1022191

I was now ready, but Frangoise had not yet telephoned; I ought perhaps to 
go out without waiting for a message. But how could I tell that she would find 
Albertine, that the latter would not have gone behind the scenes, that even if 
Fran^oise did find her, she would allow herself to be taken away? Half an hour 
later the telephone bell began to tinkle and my heart throbbed tumultuously with 
hope and fear. There came, at the bidding of an operator, a flying squadron of 
sounds which with an instantaneous speed brought me the words of the 
telephonist, not those of Fran^oise whom an inherited timidity and melancholy, 
when she was brought face to face with any object unknown to her fathers, 
prevented from approaching a telephone receiver, although she would readily 
visit a person suffering from a contagious disease. She had found Albertine in 
the lobby by herself, and Albertine had simply gone to warn Andree that she was 
not staying any longer and then had hurried back to Fran^oise. “She wasn’t 
angry? Oh, I beg your pardon; will you please ask the person whether the young 
lady was angry?” “The lady asks me to say that she wasn’t at all angry, quite the 
contrary, in fact; anyhow, if she wasn’t pleased, she didn’t shew it. They are 
starting now for the Trois-Quartiers, and will be home by two o’clock.” I 
gathered that two o’clock meant three, for it was past two o’clock already. But 
Fran^oise suffered from one of those peculiar, permanent, incurable defects, 
which we call maladies; she was never able either to read or to announce the 
time correctly. I have never been able to understand what went on in her head. 
When Framboise, after consulting her watch, if it was two o’clock, said: “It is 
one” or “it is three o’clock,” I have never been able to understand whether the 
phenomenon that occurred was situated in her vision or in her thought or in her 
speech; the one thing certain is that the phenomenon never failed to occur. 
Humanity is a very old institution. Heredity, cross-breeding have given an 
irresistible force to bad habits, to vicious reflexes. One person sneezes and gasps 
because he is passing a rosebush, another breaks out in an eruption at the smell 
of wet paint, has frequent attacks of colic if he has to start on a journey, and 
grandchildren of thieves who are themselves millionaires and generous cannot 
resist the temptation to rob you of fifty francs. As for knowing in what consisted 
Francoise’s incapacity to tell the time correctly, she herself never threw any light 
upon the problem. For, notwithstanding the anger that I generally displayed at 
her inaccurate replies, Franchise never attempted either to apologise for her 
mistake or to explain it. She remained silent, pretending not to hear, and thereby 
making me lose my temper altogether. I should have liked to hear a few words of 
justification, were it only that I might smite her hip and thigh; but not a word, an 



indifferent silence. In any case, about the timetable for to-day there could be no 
doubt; Albertine was coming home with Framboise at three o’clock, Albertine 
would not be meeting Lea or her friends. Whereupon the danger of her renewing 
relations with them, having been averted, at once began to lose its importance in 
my eyes and I was amazed, seeing with what ease it had been averted, that I 
should have supposed that I would not succeed in averting it. I felt a keen 
impulse of gratitude to Albertine, who, I could see, had not gone to the 
Trocadero to meet Lea’s friends, and shewed me, by leaving the performance 
and coming home at a word from myself, that she belonged to me more than I 
had imagined. My gratitude was even greater when a bicyclist brought me a line 
from her bidding me be patient, and full of the charming expressions that she 
was in the habit of using. “My darling, dear Marcel, I return less quickly than 
this cyclist, whose machine I would like to borrow in order to be with you 
sooner. How could you imagine that I might be angry or that I could enjoy 
anything better than to be with you? It will be nice to go out, just the two of us 
together; it would be nicer still if we never went out except together. The ideas 
you get into your head! What a Marcel! What a Marcel! Always and ever your 
Albertine.” 

The frocks that I bought for her, the yacht of which I had spoken to her, the 
wrappers from Fortuny’s, all these things having in this obedience on Albertine’s 
part not their recompense but their complement, appeared to me now as so many 
privileges that I was enjoying; for the duties and expenditure of a master are part 
of his dominion, and define it, prove it, fully as much as his rights. And these 
rights which she recognised in me were precisely what gave my expenditure its 
true character: I had a woman of my own, who, at the first word that I sent to her 
unexpectedly, made my messenger telephone humbly that she was coming, that 
she was allowing herself to be brought home immediately. I was more of a 
master than I had supposed. More of a master, in other words more of a slave. I 
no longer felt the slightest impatience to see Albertine. The certainty that she 
was at this moment engaged in shopping with Fran^oise, or that she would return 
with her at an approaching moment which I would willingly have postponed, 
illuminated like a calm and radiant star a period of time which I would now have 
been far better pleased to spend alone. My love for Albertine had made me rise 
and get ready to go out, but it would prevent me from enjoying my outing. I 
reflected that on a Sunday afternoon like this little shopgirls, midinettes, 
prostitutes must be strolling in the Bois. And with the words midinettes, little 
shopgirls (as had often happened to me with a proper name, the name of a girl 



read in the account of a ball), with the image of a white bodice, a short skirt, 
since beneath them I placed a stranger who might perhaps come to love me, I 
created out of nothing desirable women, and said to myself: “How charming 
they must be!” But of what use would it be to me that they were charming, 
seeing that I was not going out alone. Taking advantage of the fact that I still was 
alone, and drawing the curtains together so that the sun should not prevent me 
from reading the notes, I sat down at the piano, turned over the pages of 
Vinteuirs sonata which happened to be lying there, and began to play; seeing 
that Albertine’s arrival was still a matter of some time but was on the other hand 
certain, I had at once time to spare and tranquillity of mind. Floating in the 
expectation, big with security, of her return escorted by Fran^oise and in my 
confidence in her docility as in the blessedness of an inward light as warming as 
the light of the sun, I might dispose of my thoughts, detach them for a moment 
from Albertine, apply them to the sonata. In the latter, indeed, I did not take 
pains to remark how the combinations of the voluptuous and anxious motives 
corresponded even more closely now to my love for Albertine, from which 
jealousy had been absent for so long that I had been able to confess to Swann my 
ignorance of that sentiment. No, taking the sonata from another point of view, 
regarding it in itself as the work of a great artist, I was carried back upon the tide 
of sound to the days at Combray — I do not mean at Montjouvain and along the 
Meseglise way, but to walks along the Guermantes way — when I had myself 
longed to become an artist. In definitely abandoning that ambition, had I 
forfeited something real? Could life console me for the loss of art, was there in 
art a more profound reality, in which our true personality finds an expression that 
is not afforded it by the activities of life? Every great artist seems indeed so 
different from all the rest, and gives us so strongly that sensation of individuality 
for which we seek in vain in our everyday existence. Just as I was thinking thus, 
I was struck by a passage in the sonata, a passage with which I was quite 
familiar, but sometimes our attention throws a different light upon things which 
we have long known, and we remark in them what we have never seen before. 
As I played the passage, and for all that in it Vinteuil had been trying to express 
a fancy which would have been wholly foreign to Wagner, I could not help 
murmuring ‘Tristan,’ with the smile of an old friend of the family discovering a 
trace of the grandfather in an intonation, a gesture of the grandson who never set 
eyes on him. And as the friend then examines a photograph which enables him 
to estimate the likeness, so, in front of VinteuiFs sonata, I set up on the music- 
rest the score of Tristan, a selection from which was being given that afternoon, 



as it happened, at the Lamoureux concert. I had not, in admiring the Bayreuth 
master, any of the scruples of those people whom, like Nietzsche, their sense of 
duty bids to shun in art as in life the beauty that tempts them, and who, tearing 
themselves from Tristan as they renounce Parsifal, and, in their spiritual 
asceticism, progressing from one mortification to another, arrive, by following 
the most bloody of viae Cruets, at exalting themselves to the pure cognition and 
perfect adoration of Le Postilion de Longjumeau. I began to perceive how much 
reality there is in the work of Wagner, when I saw in my mind’s eye those 
insistent, fleeting themes which visit an act, withdraw only to return, and, 
sometimes distant, drowsy, almost detached, are at other moments, while 
remaining vague, so pressing and so near, so internal, so organic, so visceral, that 
one would call them the resumption not so much of a musical motive as of an 
attack of neuralgia. 

Music, very different in this respect from Albertine’s society, helped me to 
descend into myself, to make there a fresh discovery: that of the difference that I 
had sought in vain in life, in travel, a longing for which was given me, however, 
by this sonorous tide which sent its sunlit waves rolling to expire at my feet. A 
twofold difference. As the spectrum makes visible to us the composition of light, 
so the harmony of a Wagner, the colour of an Elstir enable us to know that 
essential quality of another person’s sensations into which love for another 
person does not allow us to penetrate. Then there is diversity inside the work 
itself, by the sole means that it has of being effectively diverse, to wit combining 
diverse individualities. Where a minor composer would pretend that he was 
portraying a squire, or a knight, whereas he would make them both sing the same 
music, Wagner on the contrary allots to each denomination a different reality, 
and whenever a squire appears, it is an individual figure, at once complicated 
and simplified, that, with a joyous, feudal clash of warring sounds, inscribes 
itself in the vast, sonorous mass. Whence the completeness of a music that is 
indeed filled with so many different musics, each of which is a person. A person 
or the impression that is given us by a momentary aspect of nature. Even what is 
most independent of the sentiment that it makes us feel preserves its outward and 
entirely definite reality; the song of a bird, the ring of a hunter’s horn, the air that 
a shepherd plays upon his pipe, cut out against the horizon their silhouette of 
sound. It is true that Wagner had still to bring these together, to make use of 
them, to introduce them into an orchestral whole, to make them subservient to 
the highest musical ideals, but always respecting their original nature, as a 
carpenter respects the grain, the peculiar essence of the wood that he is carving. 



But notwithstanding the richness of these works in which the contemplation 
of nature has its place by the side of action, by the side of persons who are 
something more than proper names, I thought how markedly, all the same, these 
works participate in that quality of being — albeit marvellously — always 
incomplete, which is the peculiarity of all the great works of the nineteenth 
century, with which the greatest writers of that century have stamped their 
books, but, watching themselves at work as though they were at once author and 
critic, have derived from this self-contemplation a novel beauty, exterior and 
superior to the work itself, imposing upon it retrospectively a unity, a greatness 
which it does not possess. Without pausing to consider him who saw in his 
novels, after they had appeared, a Human Comedy, nor those who entitled 
heterogeneous poems or essays The Legend of the Ages or The Bible of 
Humanity, can we not say all the same of the last of these that he is so perfect an 
incarnation of the nineteenth century that the greatest beauties in Michelet are to 
be sought not so much in his work itself as in the attitudes that he adopts when 
he is considering his work, not in his History of France nor in his History of the 
Revolution, but in his prefaces to his books? Prefaces, that is to say pages written 
after the books themselves, in which he considers the books, and with which we 
must include here and there certain phrases beginning as a rule with a: “Shall I 
say?” which is not a scholar’s precaution but a musician’s cadence. The other 
musician, he who was delighting me at this moment, Wagner, retrieving some 
exquisite scrap from a drawer of his writing-table to make it appear as a theme, 
retrospectively necessary, in a work of which he had not been thinking at the 
moment when he composed it, then having composed a first mythological opera, 
and a second, and afterwards others still, and perceiving all of a sudden that he 
had written a tetralogy, must have felt something of the same exhilaration as 
Balzac, when, casting over his works the eye at once of a stranger and of a 
father, finding in one the purity of Raphael, in another the simplicity of the 
Gospel, he suddenly decided, as he shed a retrospective illumination upon them, 
that they would be better brought together in a cycle in which the same 
characters would reappear, and added to his work, in this act of joining it 
together, a stroke of the brush, the last and the most sublime. A unity that was 
ulterior, not artificial, otherwise it would have crumbled into dust like all the 
other systematisations of mediocre writers who with the elaborate assistance of 
titles and sub-titles give themselves the appearance of having pursued a single 
and transcendent design. Not fictitious, perhaps indeed all the more real for 
being ulterior, for being born of a moment of enthusiasm when it is discovered to 



exist among fragments which need only to be joined together. A unity that has 
been unaware of itself, therefore vital and not logical, that has not banned 
variety, chilled execution. It emerges (only applying itself this time to the work 
as a whole) like a fragment composed separately, born of an inspiration, not 
required by the artificial development of a theme, which comes in to form an 
integral part of the rest. Before the great orchestral movement that precedes the 
return of Yseult, it is the work itself that has attracted to it the half-forgotten air 
of a shepherd’s pipe. And, no doubt, just as the swelling of the orchestra at the 
approach of the ship, when it takes hold of these notes on the pipe, transforms 
them, infects them with its own intoxication, breaks their rhythm, clarifies their 
tone, accelerates their movement, multiplies their instrumentation, so no doubt 
Wagner himself was filled with joy when he discovered in his memory a 
shepherd’s air, incorporated it in his work, gave it its full wealth of meaning. 
This joy moreover never forsakes him. In him, however great the melancholy of 
the poet, it is consoled, surpassed — that is to say destroyed, alas, too soon — by 
the delight of the craftsman. But then, no less than by the similarity I had 
remarked just now between Vinteuil’s phrase and Wagner’s, I was troubled by 
the thought of this Vulcan-like craftsmanship. Could it be this that gave to great 
artists the illusory appearance of a fundamental originality, incommensurable 
with any other, the reflexion of a more than human reality, actually the result of 
industrious toil? If art be no more than that, it is not more real than life and I had 
less cause for regret. I went on playing Tristan. Separated from Wagner by the 
wall of sound, I could hear him exult, invite me to share his joy, I could hear ring 
out all the louder the immortally youthful laugh and the hammer-blows of 
Siegfried, in which, moreover, more marvellously struck were those phrases, the 
technical skill of the craftsman serving merely to make it easier for them to leave 
the earth, birds akin not to Lohengrin’s swan but to that aeroplane which I had 
seen at Balbec convert its energy into vertical motion, float over the sea and lose 
itself in the sky. Perhaps, as the birds that soar highest and fly most swiftly have 
a stronger wing, one required one of these frankly material vehicles to explore 
the infinite, one of these 120 horsepower machines, marked Mystery, in which 
nevertheless, however high one flies, one is prevented to some extent from 
enjoying the silence of space by the overpowering roar of the engine! 

For some reason or other the course of my musings, which hitherto had 
wandered among musical memories, turned now to those men who have been 
the best performers of music in our day, among whom, slightly exaggerating his 
merit, I included Morel. At once my thoughts took a sharp turn, and it was 



Morel’s character, certain eccentricities of his nature that I began to consider. As 
it happened — and this might be connected though it should not be confused 
with the neurasthenia to which he was a prey — Morel was in the habit of 
talking about his life, but always presented so shadowy a picture of it that it was 
difficult to make anything out. For instance, he placed himself entirely at M. de 
Charlus’s disposal on the understanding that he must keep his evenings free, as 
he wished to be able after dinner to attend a course of lectures on algebra. M. de 
Charlus conceded this, but insisted upon seeing him after the lectures. 
“Impossible, it’s an old Italian painting” (this witticism means nothing when 
written down like this; but M. de Charlus having made Morel read l’Education 
sentimentale, in the penultimate chapter of which Frederic Moreau uses this 
expression, it was Morel’s idea of a joke never to say the word ‘impossible’ 
without following it up with “it’s an old Italian painting”) “the lectures go on 
very late, and I’ve already given a lot of trouble to the lecturer, who naturally 
would be annoyed if I came away in the middle.” “But there’s no need to attend 
lectures, algebra is not a thing like swimming, or even English, you can learn it 
equally well from a book,” replied M. de Charlus, who had guessed from the 
first that these algebra lectures were one of those images of which it was 
impossible to make out anything. It was perhaps some affair with a woman, or, if 
Morel was seeking to earn money in shady ways and had attached himself to the 
secret police, a nocturnal expedition with detectives, or possibly, what was even 
worse, an engagement as one of the young men whose services may be required 
in a brothel. “A great deal easier, from a book,” Morel assured M. de Charlus, 
“for it’s impossible to make head or tail of the lectures.” “Then why don’t you 
study it in my house, where you would be far more comfortable?” M. de Charlus 
might have answered, but took care not to do so, knowing that at once, 
preserving only the same essential element that the evening hours must be set 
apart, the imaginary algebra course would change to a compulsory lesson in 
dancing or in drawing. In which M. de Charlus might have seen that he was 
mistaken, partially at least, for Morel did often spend his time at the Baron’s in 
solving equations. M. de Charlus did raise the objection that algebra could be of 
little use to a violinist. Morel replied that it was a distraction which helped him 
to pass the time and to conquer his neurasthenia. No doubt M. de Charlus might 
have made inquiries, have tried to find out what actually were these mysterious 
and ineluctable lectures on algebra that were delivered only at night. But M. de 
Charlus was not qualified to unravel the tangled skein of Morel’s occupations, 
being himself too much caught in the toils of social life. The visits he received or 



paid, the time he spent at his club, dinner-parties, evenings at the theatre 
prevented him from thinking about the problem, or for that matter about the 
violent and vindictive animosity which Morel had (it was reported) indulged and 
at the same time sought to conceal in the various environments, the different 
towns in which his life had been spent, and where people still spoke of him with 
a shudder, with bated breath, never venturing to say anything definite about him. 

It was unfortunately one of the outbursts of this neurotic irritability that I 
was privileged to hear that day when, rising from the piano, I went down to the 
courtyard to meet Albertine, who still did not appear. As I passed by Jupien’s 
shop, in which Morel and the girl who, I supposed, was shortly to become his 
wife were by themselves, Morel was screaming at the top of his voice, thereby 
revealing an accent that I had never heard in his speech, a rustic tone, suppressed 
as a rule, and very strange indeed. His words were no less strange, faulty from 
the point of view of the French language, but his knowledge of everything was 
imperfect. “Will you get out of here, grand pied de grue, grand pied de grue, 
grand pied de grue,” he repeated to the poor girl who at first had certainly not 
understood what he meant, and now, trembling and indignant, stood motionless 
before him. “Didn’t I tell you to get out of here, grand pied de grue, grand pied 
de grue; go and fetch your uncle till I tell him what you are, you whore.” Just at 
that moment the voice of Jupien who was coming home talking to one of his 
friends was heard in the courtyard, and as I knew that Morel was an utter 
coward, I decided that it was unnecessary to join my forces with those of Jupien 
and his friend, who in another moment would have entered the shop, and I 
retired upstairs again to escape Morel, who, for all his having pretended to be so 
anxious that Jupien should be fetched (probably in order to frighten and 
subjugate the girl, an act of blackmail which rested probably upon no 
foundation), made haste to depart as soon as he heard his voice in the courtyard. 
The words I have set down here are nothing, they would not explain why my 
heart throbbed so as I went upstairs. These scenes of which we are witnesses in 
real life find an incalculable element of strength in what soldiers call, in 
speaking of a military offensive, the advantage of surprise, and however 
agreeably I might be soothed by the knowledge that Albertine, instead of 
remaining at the Trocadero, was coming home to me, I still heard ringing in my 
ears the accent of those words ten times repeated: “Grand pied de grue, grand 
pied de grue,” which had so appalled me. 

Gradually my agitation subsided. Albertine was on her way home. I should 
hear her ring the bell in a moment. I felt that my life was no longer what it might 



have become, and that to have a woman in the house like this with whom quite 
naturally, when she returned home, I should have to go out, to the adornment of 
whose person the strength and activity of my nature were to be ever more and 
more diverted, made me as it were a bough that has blossomed, but is weighed 
down by the abundant fruit into which all its reserves of strength have passed. In 
contrast to the anxiety that I had been feeling only an hour earlier, the calm that I 
now felt at the prospect of Albertine’s return was more ample than that which I 
had felt in the morning before she left the house. Anticipating the future, of 
which my mistress’s docility made me practically master, more resistant, as 
though it were filled and stabilised by the imminent, importunate, inevitable, 
gentle presence, it was the calm (dispensing us from the obligation to seek our 
happiness in ourselves) that is born of family feeling and domestic bliss. Family 
and domestic: such was again, no less than the sentiment that had brought me 
such great peace while I was waiting for Albertine, that which I felt later on 
when I drove out with her. She took off her glove for a moment, whether to 
touch my hand, or to dazzle me by letting me see on her little finger, next to the 
ring that Mme. Bontemps had given her, another upon which was displayed the 
large and liquid surface of a clear sheet of ruby. “What! Another ring, Albertine. 
Your aunt is generous!” “No, I didn’t get this from my aunt,” she said with a 
laugh. “It was I who bought it, now that, thanks to you, I can save up ever so 
much money. I don’t even know whose it was before. A visitor who was short of 
money left it with the landlord of an hotel where I stayed at Le Mans. He didn’t 
know what to do with it, and would have let it go for much less than it was 
worth. But it was still far too dear for me. Now that, thanks to you, I’m 
becoming a smart lady, I wrote to ask him if he still had it. And here it is.” “That 
makes a great many rings, Albertine. Where will you put the one that I am going 
to give you? Anyhow, it is a beautiful ring, I can’t quite make out what that is 
carved round the ruby, it looks like a man’s head grinning. But my eyes aren’t 
strong enough.” “They might be as strong as you like, you would be no better 
off. I can’t make it out either.” In the past it had often happened, as I read 
somebody’s memoirs, or a novel, in which a man always goes out driving with a 
woman, takes tea with her, that I longed to be able to do likewise. I had thought 
sometimes that I was successful, as for instance when I took Saint-Loup’s 
mistress out with me, or went to dinner with her. But in vain might I summon to 
my assistance the idea that I was at that moment actually impersonating the 
character that I had envied in the novel, that idea assured me that I ought to find 
pleasure in Rachel’s society, and afforded me none. For, whenever we attempt to 



imitate something that has really existed, we forget that this something was 
brought about not by the desire to imitate but by an unconscious force which 
itself also is real; but this particular impression which I had been unable to 
derive from all my desire to taste a delicate pleasure in going out with Rachel, 
behold I was now tasting it without having made the slightest effort to procure it, 
but for quite different reasons, sincere, profound; to take a single instance, for 
the reason that my jealousy prevented me from letting Albertine go out of my 
sight, and, the moment that I was able to leave the house, from letting her go 
anywhere without me. I tasted it only now, because our knowledge is not of the 
external objects which we try to observe, but of involuntary sensations, because 
in the past a woman might be sitting in the same carriage as myself, she was not 
really by my side, so long as she was not created afresh there at every moment 
by a need of her such as I felt of Albertine, so long as the constant caress of my 
gaze did not incessantly restore to her those tints that need to be perpetually 
refreshed, so long as my senses, appeased it might be but still endowed with 
memory, did not place beneath those colours savour and substance, so long as, 
combined with the senses and with the imagination that exalts them, jealousy 
was not maintaining the woman in equilibrium by my side by a compensated 
attraction as powerful as the law of gravity. Our motor-car passed swiftly along 
the boulevards, the avenues whose lines of houses, a rosy congelation of 
sunshine and cold, reminded me of calling upon Mme. Swann in the soft light of 
her chrysanthemums, before it was time to ring for the lamps. 

I had barely time to make out, being divided from them by the glass of the 
motor-car as effectively as I should have been by that of my bedroom window, a 
young fruit seller, a dairymaid, standing in the doorway of her shop, illuminated 
by the sunshine like a heroine whom my desire was sufficient to launch upon 
exquisite adventures, on the threshold of a romance which I might never know. 
For I could not ask Albertine to let me stop, and already the young women were 
no longer visible whose features my eyes had barely distinguished, barely 
caressed their fresh complexions in the golden vapour in which they were 
bathed. The emotion that I felt grip me when I caught sight of a wine-merchant’s 
girl at her desk or a laundress chatting in the street was the emotion that we feel 
on recognising a goddess. Now that Olympus no longer exists, its inhabitants 
dwell upon the earth. And when, in composing a mythological scene, painters 
have engaged to pose as Venus or Ceres young women of humble birth, who 
follow the most sordid callings, so far from committing sacrilege, they have 
merely added, restored to them the quality, the various attributes which they had 



forfeited. “What did you think of the Trocadero, you little gadabout?” “I’m jolly 
glad I came away from it to go out with you. As architecture, it’s pretty measly, 
isn’t it? It’s by Davioud, I fancy.” “But how learned my little Albertine is 
becoming! Of course it was Davioud who built it, but I couldn’t have told you 
offhand.” “While you are asleep, I read your books, you old lazybones.” “Listen, 
child, you are changing so fast and becoming so intelligent” (this was true, but 
even had it not been true I was not sorry that she should have the satisfaction, 
failing any other, of saying to herself that at least the time which she spent in my 
house was not being entirely wasted) “that I don’t mind telling you things that 
would generally be regarded as false and which are all on the way to a truth that 
I am seeking. You know what is meant by impressionism?” “Of course!” “Very 
well then, this is what I mean: you remember the church at Marcouville 
l’Orgueilleuse which Elstir disliked because it was new. Isn’t it rather a denial of 
his own impressionism when he subtracts such buildings from the general 
impression in which they are contained to bring them out of the light in which 
they are dissolved and scrutinise like an archaeologist their intrinsic merit? 
When he begins to paint, have not a hospital, a school, a poster upon a hoarding 
the same value as a priceless cathedral which stands by their side in a single 
indivisible image? Remember how the facade was baked by the sun, how that 
carved frieze of saints swam upon the sea of light. What does it matter that a 
building is new, if it appears to be old, or even if it does not. All the poetry that 
the old quarters contain has been squeezed out to the last drop, but if you look at 
some of the houses that have been built lately for rich tradesmen, in the new 
districts, where the stone is all freshly cut and still quite white, don’t they seem 
to rend the torrid air of noon in July, at the hour when the shopkeepers go home 
to luncheon in the suburbs, with a cry as harsh as the odour of the cherries 
waiting for the meal to begin in the darkened dining-room, where the prismatic 
glass knife-rests project a multicoloured fire as beautiful as the windows of 
Chartres?” “How wonderful you are! If I ever do become clever, it will be 
entirely owing to you.” “Why on a fine day tear your eyes away from the 
Trocadero, whose giraffe-neck towers remind one of the Charterhouse of 
Pavia?” “It reminded me also, standing up like that on its hill, of a Mantegna that 
you have, I think it’s of Saint Sebastian, where in the background there’s a city 
like an amphitheatre, and you would swear you saw the Trocadero.” “There, you 
see! But how did you come across my Mantegna? You are amazing!” We had 
now reached a more plebeian quarter, and the installation of an ancillary Venus 
behind each counter made it as it were a suburban altar at the foot of which I 



would gladly have spent the rest of my life. 

As one does on the eve of a premature death, I drew up a mental list of the 
pleasures of which I was deprived by Albertine’s setting a full stop to my 
freedom. At Passy it was in the open street, so crowded were the footways, that a 
group of girls, their arms encircling one another’s waist, left me marvelling at 
their smile. I had not time to see it clearly, but it is hardly probable that I 
exaggerated it; in any crowd after all, in any crowd of young people, it is not 
unusual to come upon the effigy of a noble profile. So that these assembled 
masses on public holidays are to the voluptuary as precious as is to the 
archaeologist the congested state of a piece of ground in which digging will 
bring to light ancient medals. We arrived at the Bois. I reflected that, if Albertine 
had not come out with me, I might at this moment, in the enclosure of the 
Champs-Elysees, have been hearing the Wagnerian tempest set all the rigging of 
the orchestra ascream, draw to itself, like a light spindrift, the tune of the 
shepherd’s pipe which I had just been playing to myself, set it flying, mould it, 
deform it, divide it, sweep it away in an ever-increasing whirlwind. I was 
determined, at any rate, that our drive should be short, and that we should return 
home early, for, without having mentioned it to Albertine, I had decided to go 
that evening to the Verdurins’. They had recently sent me an invitation which I 
had flung into the waste-paper basket with all the rest. But I changed my mind 
for this evening, for I meant to try to find out who the people were that Albertine 
might have been hoping to meet there in the afternoon. To tell the truth, I had 
reached that stage in my relations with Albertine when, if everything remains the 
same, if things go on normally, a woman ceases to serve us except as a starting 
point towards another woman. She still retains a corner in our heart, but a very 
small corner; we hasten out every evening in search of unknown women, 
especially unknown women who are known to her and can tell us about her life. 
Herself, after all, we have possessed, have exhausted everything that she has 
consented to yield to us of herself. Her life is still herself, but that part of herself 
which we do not know, the things as to which we have questioned her in vain 
and which we shall be able to gather from fresh lips. 

If my life with Albertine was to prevent me from going to Venice, from 
travelling, at least I might in the meantime, had I been alone, have made the 
acquaintance of the young midinettes scattered about in the sunlight of this fine 
Sunday, in the sum total of whose beauty I gave a considerable place to the 
unknown life that animated them. The eyes that we see, are they not shot through 
by a gaze as to which we do not know what images, memories, expectations, 



disdains it carries, a gaze from which we cannot separate them? The life that the 
person who passes by is living, will it not impart, according to what it is, a 
different value to the knitting of those brows, to the dilatation of those nostrils? 
Albertine’s presence debarred me from going to join them and perhaps also from 
ceasing to desire them. The man who would maintain in himself the desire to go 
on living, and his belief in something more delicious than the things of daily life, 
must go out driving; for the streets, the avenues are full of goddesses. But the 
goddesses do not allow us to approach them. Here and there, among the trees, at 
the entrance to some cafe, a waitress was watching like a nymph on the edge of a 
sacred grove, while beyond her three girls were seated by the sweeping arc of 
their bicycles that were stacked beside them, like three immortals leaning against 
the clouds or the fabulous coursers upon which they perform their mythological 
journeys. I remarked that, whenever Albertine looked for a moment at these 
girls, with a profound attention, she at once turned to gaze at myself. But I was 
not unduly troubled, either by the intensity of this contemplation, or by its 
brevity for which its intensity compensated; as for the latter, it often happened 
that Albertine, whether from exhaustion, or because it was an intense person’s 
way of looking at other people, used to gaze thus in a sort of brown study at my 
father, it might be, or at Fran^oise; and as for the rapidity with which she turned 
to look at myself, it might be due to the fact that Albertine, knowing my 
suspicions, might prefer, even if they were not justified, to avoid giving them 
any foothold. This attention, moreover, which would have seemed to me 
criminal on Albertine’s part (and quite as much so if it had been directed at 
young men), I fastened, without thinking myself reprehensible for an instant, 
almost deciding indeed that Albertine was reprehensible for preventing me, by 
her presence, from stopping the car and going to join them, upon all the 
midinettes. We consider it innocent to desire a thing and atrocious that the other 
person should desire it. And this contrast between what concerns ourselves on 
the one hand, and on the other the person with whom we are in love, is not 
confined only to desire, but extends also to falsehood. What is more usual than a 
lie, whether it is a question of masking the daily weakness of a constitution 
which we wish to be thought strong, of concealing a vice, or of going off, 
without offending the other person, to the thing that we prefer? It is the most 
necessary instrument of conversation, and the one that is most widely used. But 
it is this which we actually propose to banish from the life of her whom we love; 
we watch for it, scent it, detest it everywhere. It appalls us, it is sufficient to 
bring about a rupture, it seems to us to be concealing the most serious faults, 



except when it does so effectively conceal them that we do not suspect their 
existence. A strange state this in which we are so inordinately sensitive to a 
pathogenic agent which its universal swarming makes inoffensive to other 
people and so serious to the wretch who finds that he is no longer immune to it. 

The life of these pretty girls (because of my long periods of seclusion, I so 
rarely met any) appeared to me as to everyone in whom facility of realisation has 
not destroyed the faculty of imagination, a thing as different from anything that I 
knew, as desirable as the most marvellous cities that travel holds in store for us. 

The disappointment that I had felt with the women whom I had known, in 
the cities which I had visited, did not prevent me from letting myself be caught 
by the attraction of others or from believing in their reality; thus, just as seeing 
Venice — that Venice for which the spring weather too filled me with longing, 
and which marriage with Albertine would prevent me from knowing — seeing 
Venice in a panorama which Ski would perhaps have declared to be more 
beautiful in tone than the place itself, would to me have been no substitute for 
the journey to Venice the length of which, determined without any reference to 
myself, seemed to me an indispensable preliminary; similarly, however pretty 
she might be, the midinette whom a procuress had artificially provided for me 
could not possibly be a substitute for her who with her awkward figure was 
strolling at this moment under the trees, laughing with a friend. The girl that I 
might find in a house of assignation, were she even better-looking than this one, 
could not be the same thing, because we do not look at the eyes of a girl whom 
we do not know as we should look at a pair of little discs of opal or agate. We 
know that the little ray which colours them or the diamond dust that makes them 
sparkle is all that we can see of a mind, a will, a memory in which is contained 
the home life that we do not know, the intimate friends whom we envy. The 
enterprise of taking possession of all this, which is so difficult, so stubborn, is 
what gives its value to the gaze far more than its merely physical beauty (which 
may serve to explain why the same young man can awaken a whole romance in 
the imagination of a woman who has heard somebody say that he is the Prince of 
Wales, whereas she pays no more attention to him after learning that she is 
mistaken); to find the midinette in the house of assignation is to find her emptied 
of that unknown life which permeates her and which we aspire to possess with 
her, it is to approach a pair of eyes that have indeed become mere precious 
stones, a nose whose quivering is as devoid of meaning as that of a flower. No, 
that unknown midinette who was passing at that moment, it seemed to me as 
indispensable, if I wished to continue to believe in her reality, to test her 



resistance by adapting my behaviour to it, challenging a rebuff, returning to the 
charge, obtaining an assignation, waiting for her as she came away from her 
work, getting to know, episode by episode, all that composed the girl’s life, 
traversing the space that, for her, enveloped the pleasure which I was seeking, 
and the distance which her different habits, her special mode of life, set between 
me and the attention, the favour which I wished to attain and capture, as making 
a long journey in the train if I wished to believe in the reality of Venice which I 
should see and which would not be merely a panoramic show in a World 
Exhibition. But this very parallel between desire and travel made me vow to 
myself that one day I would grasp a little more closely the nature of this force, 
invisible but as powerful as any faith, or as, in the world of physics, atmospheric 
pressure, which exalted to such a height cities and women so long as I did not 
know them, and slipped away from beneath them as soon as I had approached 
them, made them at once collapse and fall flat upon the dead level of the most 
commonplace reality. 

Farther along another girl was kneeling beside her bicycle, which she was 
putting to rights. The repair finished, the young racer mounted her machine, but 
without straddling it as a man would have done. For a moment the bicycle 
swerved, and the young body seemed to have added to itself a sail, a huge wing; 
and presently we saw dart away at full speed the young creature half-human, 
half-winged, angel or peri, pursuing her course. 

This was what a life with Albertine prevented me from enjoying. Prevented 
me, did I say? Should I not have thought rather: what it provided for my 
enjoyment. If Albertine had not been living with me, had been free, I should 
have imagined, and with reason, every woman to be a possible, a probable object 
of her desire, of her pleasure. They would have appeared to me like those 
dancers who, in a diabolical ballet, representing the Temptations to one person, 
plunge their darts in the heart of another. Midinettes, schoolgirls, actresses, how 
I should have hated them all! Objects of horror, I should have excepted them 
from the beauty of the universe. My bondage to Albertine, by permitting me not 
to suffer any longer on their account, restored them to the beauty of the world. 
Inoffensive, having lost the needle that stabs the heart with jealousy, I was able 
to admire them, to caress them with my eyes, another day more intimately 
perhaps. By secluding Albertine, I had at the same time restored to the universe 
all those rainbow wings which sweep past us in public gardens, ballrooms, 
theatres, and which became tempting once more to me because she could no 
longer succumb to their temptation. They composed the beauty of the world. 



They had at one time composed that of Albertine. It was because I had beheld 
her as a mysterious bird, then as a great actress of the beach, desired, perhaps 
won, that I had thought her wonderful. As soon as she was a captive in my 
house, the bird that I had seen one afternoon advancing with measured step 
along the front, surrounded by the congregation of the other girls like seagulls 
alighted from who knows whence, Albertine had lost all her colours, with all the 
chances that other people had of securing her for themselves. Gradually she had 
lost her beauty. It required excursions like this, in which I imagined her, but for 
my presence, accosted by some woman, or by some young man, to make me see 
her again amid the splendour of the beach, albeit my jealousy was on a different 
plane from the decline of the pleasures of my imagination. But notwithstanding 
these abrupt reversions in which, desired by other people, she once more became 
beautiful in my eyes, I might very well divide her visit to me in two periods, an 
earlier in which she was still, although less so every day, the glittering actress of 
the beach, and a later period in which, become the grey captive, reduced to her 
dreary self, I required those flashes in which I remembered the past to make me 
see her again in colour. 

Sometimes, in the hours in which I felt most indifferent towards her, there 
came back to me the memory of a far-off moment when upon the beach, before I 
had made her acquaintance, a lady being near her with whom I was on bad terms 
and with whom I was almost certain now that she had had relations, she burst out 
laughing, staring me in the face in an insolent fashion. All round her hissed the 
blue and polished sea. In the sunshine of the beach, Albertine, in the midst of her 
friends, was the most beautiful of them all. She was a splendid girl, who in her 
familiar setting of boundless waters, had — precious in the eyes of the lady who 
admired her — inflicted upon me this unpardonable insult. It was unpardonable, 
for the lady would perhaps return to Balbec, would notice perhaps, on the 
luminous and echoing beach, that Albertine was absent. But she would not know 
that the girl was living with me, was wholly mine. The vast expanse of blue 
water, her forgetfulness of the fondness that she had felt for this particular girl 
and would divert to others, had closed over the outrage that Albertine had done 
me, enshrining it in a glittering and unbreakable casket. Then hatred of that 
woman gnawed my heart; of Albertine also, but a hatred mingled with 
admiration of the beautiful, courted girl, with her marvellous hair, whose 
laughter upon the beach had been an insult. Shame, jealousy, the memory of my 
earliest desires and of the brilliant setting had restored to Albertine the beauty, 
the intrinsic merit of other days. And thus there alternated with the somewhat 



oppressive boredom that I felt in her company a throbbing desire, full of 
splendid storms and of regrets; according to whether she was by my side in my 
bedroom or I set her at liberty in my memory upon the front, in her gay seaside 
frocks, to the sound of the musical instruments of the sea — Albertine, now 
extracted from that environment, possessed and of no great value, now plunged 
back into it, escaping from me into a past which I should never be able to know, 
hurting me, in her friend’s presence, as much as the splash of the wave or the 
heat of the sun — Albertine restored to the beach or brought back again to my 
room, in a sort of amphibious love. 

Farther on, a numerous band were playing ball. All these girls had come out 
to make the most of the sunshine, for these days in February, even when they are 
brilliant, do not last long and the splendour of their light does not postpone the 
hour of its decline. Before that hour drew near, we passed some time in twilight, 
because after we had driven as far as the Seine, where Albertine admired, and by 
her presence prevented me from admiring the reflexions of red sails upon the 
wintry blue of the water, a solitary house in the distance like a single red poppy 
against the clear horizon, of which Saint-Cloud seemed, farther off again, to be 
the fragmentary, crumbling, rugged petrification, we left our motor-car and 
walked a long way together; indeed for some moments I gave her my arm, and it 
seemed to me that the ring which her arm formed round it united our two 
persons in a single self and linked our separate destinies together. 

At our feet, our parallel shadows, where they approached and joined, traced 
an exquisite pattern. No doubt it already seemed to me a marvellous thing at 
home that Albertine should be living with me, that it should be she that came and 
lay down on my bed. But it was so to speak the transportation of that marvel out 
of doors, into the heart of nature, that by the shore of that lake in the Bois, of 
which I was so fond, beneath the trees, it should be her and none but her shadow, 
the pure and simplified shadow of her leg, of her bust, that the sun had to depict 
in monochrome by the side of mine upon the gravel of the path. And I found a 
charm that was more immaterial doubtless, but no less intimate, than in the 
drawing together, the fusion of our bodies, in that of our shadows. Then we 
returned to our car. And it chose, for our homeward journey, a succession of little 
winding lanes along which the wintry trees, clothed, like ruins, in ivy and 
brambles, seemed to be pointing the way to the dwelling of some magician. No 
sooner had we emerged from their dusky cover than we found, upon leaving the 
Bois, the daylight still so bright that I imagined that I should still have time to do 
everything that I wanted to do before dinner, when, only a few minutes later, at 



the moment when our car approached the Arc de Triomphe, it was with a sudden 
start of surprise and dismay that I perceived, over Paris, the moon prematurely 
full, like the face of a clock that has stopped and makes us think that we are late 
for an engagement. We had told the driver to take us home. To Albertine, this 
meant also coming to my home. The company of those women, however dear to 
us, who are obliged to leave us and return home, does not bestow that peace 
which I found in the company of Albertine seated in the car by my side, a 
company that was conveying us not to the void in which lovers have to part but 
to an even more stable and more sheltered union in my home, which was also 
hers, the material symbol of my possession of her. To be sure, in order to 
possess, one must first have desired. We do not possess a line, a surface, a mass 
unless it is occupied by our love. But Albertine had not been for me during our 
drive, as Rachel had been in the past, a futile dust of flesh and clothing. The 
imagination of my eyes, my lips, my hands had at Balbec so solidly built, so 
tenderly polished her body that now in this car, to touch that body, to contain it, I 
had no need to press my own body against Albertine, nor even to see her; it was 
enough to hear her, and if she was silent to know that she was by my side; my 
interwoven senses enveloped her altogether and when, as we arrived at the front 
door, she quite naturally alighted, I stopped for a moment to tell the chauffeur to 
call for me later on, but my gaze enveloped her still while she passed ahead of 
me under the arch, and it was still the same inert, domestic calm that I felt as I 
saw her thus, solid, flushed, opulent and captive, returning home quite naturally 
with myself, as a woman who was my own property, and, protected by its walls, 
disappearing into our house. Unfortunately, she seemed to feel herself a prisoner 
there, and to share the opinion of that Mme. de La Rochefoucauld who, when 
somebody asked her whether she was not glad to live in so beautiful a home as 
Liancourt, replied: “There is no such thing as a beautiful prison”; if I was to 
judge by her miserable, weary expression that evening as we dined together in 
my room. I did not notice it at first; and it was I that was made wretched by the 
thought that, if it had not been for Albertine (for with her I should have suffered 
too acutely from jealousy in an hotel where all day long she would have been 
exposed to contact with a crowd of strangers), I might at that moment be dining 
in Venice in one of those little restaurants, barrel-vaulted like the hold of a ship, 
from which one looks out on the Grand Canal through arched windows framed 
in Moorish mouldings. 

I ought to add that Albertine greatly admired in my room a big bronze by 
Barbedienne which with ample justification Bloch considered extremely ugly. 



He had perhaps less reason to be surprised at my having kept it. I had never 
sought, like him, to furnish for artistic effect, to compose my surroundings, I was 
too lazy, too indifferent to the things that I was in the habit of seeing every day. 
Since my taste was not involved, I had a right not to harmonise my interior. I 
might perhaps, even without that, have discarded the bronze. But ugly and 
expensive things are of great use, for they enjoy, among people who do not 
understand us, who have not our taste and with whom we cannot fall in love, a 
prestige that would not be shared by some proud object that does not reveal its 
beauty. Now the people who do not understand us are precisely the people with 
regard to whom alone it may be useful to us to employ a prestige which our 
intellect is enough, to assure us among superior people. Albertine might indeed 
be beginning to shew taste, she still felt a certain respect for the bronze, and this 
respect was reflected upon myself in a consideration which, coming from 
Albertine, mattered infinitely more to me than the question of keeping a bronze 
which was a trifle degrading, since I was in love with Albertine. 

But the thought of my bondage ceased of a sudden to weigh upon me and I 
looked forward to prolonging it still further, because I seemed to perceive that 
Albertine was painfully conscious of her own. True that whenever I had asked 
her whether she was not bored in my house, she had always replied that she did 
not know where it would be possible to have a happier time. But often these 
words were contradicted by an air of nervous exhaustion, of longing to escape. 

Certainly if she had the tastes with which I had credited her, this inhibition 
from ever satisfying them must have been as provoking to her as it was calming 
to myself, calming to such an extent that I should have decided that the 
hypothesis of my having accused her unjustly was the most probable, had it not 
been so difficult to fit into this hypothesis the extraordinary pains that Albertine 
was taking never to be alone, never to be disengaged, never to stop for a moment 
outside the front door when she came in, to insist upon being accompanied, 
whenever she went to the telephone, by some one who would be able to repeat to 
me what she had said, by Fran^oise or Andree, always to leave me alone 
(without appearing to be doing so on purpose) with the latter, after they had been 
out together, so that I might obtain a detailed report of their outing. With this 
marvellous docility were contrasted certain quickly repressed starts of 
impatience, which made me ask myself whether Albertine was not planning to 
cast off her chain. Certain subordinate incidents seemed to corroborate my 
supposition. Thus, one day when I had gone out by myself, in the Passy 
direction, and had met Gisele, we began to talk about one thing and another. 



Presently, not without pride at being able to do so, I informed her that I was 
constantly seeing Albertine. Gisele asked me where she could find her, since 
there was something that she simply mustteW her. “Why, what is it?” “Something 
to do with some young friends of hers.” “What friends? I may perhaps be able to 
tell you, though that need not prevent you from seeing her.” “Oh, girls she knew 
years ago, I don’t remember their names,” Gisele replied vaguely, and beat a 
retreat. She left me, supposing herself to have spoken with such prudence that 
the whole story must seem to me perfectly straightforward. But falsehood is so 
unexacting, needs so little help to make itself manifest! If it had been a question 
of friends of long ago, whose very names she no longer remembered, why must 
she speak about them to Albertine? This ‘must,’ akin to an expression dear to 
Mme. Cottard: ‘in the nick of time,’ could be applicable only to something 
particular, opportune, perhaps urgent, relating to definite persons. Besides, 
something about her way of opening her mouth, as though she were going to 
yawn, with a vague expression, as she said to me (almost drawing back her body, 
as though she began to reverse her engine at this point in our conversation): “Oh, 
I don’t know, I don’t remember their names,” made her face, and in harmony 
with it her voice, as clear a picture of falsehood as the wholly different air, tense, 
excited, of her previous ‘ must ’ was of truth. I did not question Gisele. Of what 
use would it have been to me? Certainly, she was not lying in the same fashion 
as Albertine. And certainly Albertine’s lies pained me more. But they had 
obviously a point in common: the fact of the lie itself, which in certain cases is 
self-evident. Not evidence of the truth that the lie conceals. We know that each 
murderer in turn imagines that he has arranged everything so cleverly that he 
will not be caught, and so it is with liars, particularly the woman with whom we 
are in love. We do not know where she has been, what she has been doing. But at 
the very moment when she speaks, when she speaks of something else beneath 
which lies hidden the thing that she does not mention, the lie is immediately 
perceived, and our jealousy increased, since we are conscious of the lie, and 
cannot succeed in discovering the truth. With Albertine, the impression that she 
was lying was conveyed by many of the peculiarities which we have already 
observed in the course of this narrative, but especially by this, that, when she 
was lying, her story broke down either from inadequacy, omission, 
improbability, or on the contrary from a surfeit of petty details intended to make 
it seem probable. Probability, notwithstanding the idea that the liar has formed of 
it, is by no means the same as truth. Whenever, while listening to something that 
is true, we hear something that is only probable, which is perhaps more so than 



the truth, which is perhaps too probable, the ear that is at all sensitive feels that it 
is not correct, as with a line that does not scan or a word read aloud in mistake 
for another. Our ear feels this, and if we are in love our heart takes alarm. Why 
do we not reflect at the time, when we change the whole course of our life 
because we do not know whether a woman went along the Rue de Berri or the 
Rue Washington, why do we not reflect that these few hundred yards of 
difference, and the woman herself, will be reduced to the hundred millionth part 
of themselves (that is to say to dimensions far beneath our perception), if we 
only have the wisdom to remain for a few years without seeing the woman, and 
that she who has out-Gullivered Gulliver in our eyes will shrink to a Lilliputian 
whom no microscope — of the heart, at least, for that of the disinterested 
memory is more powerful and less fragile — can ever again perceive! However 
it may be, if there was a point in common — the lie itself — between Albertine’s 
lies and Gisele’s, still Gisele did not lie in the same fashion as Albertine, nor 
indeed in the same fashion as Andree, but their respective lies dovetailed so 
neatly into one another, while presenting a great variety, that the little band had 
the impenetrable solidity of certain commercial houses, booksellers’ for example 
or printing presses, where the wretched author will never succeed, 
notwithstanding the diversity of the persons employed in them, in discovering 
whether he is being swindled or not. The editor of the newspaper or review lies 
with an attitude of sincerity all the more solemn in that he is frequently obliged 
to conceal the fact that he himself does exactly the same things and indulges in 
the same commercial practices that he denounced in other editors or theatrical 
managers, in other publishers, when he chose as his battle-cry, when he raised 
against them the standard of Sincerity. The fact of a man’s having proclaimed (as 
leader of a political party, or in any other capacity) that it is wicked to lie, 
obliges him as a rule to lie more than other people, without on that account 
abandoning the solemn mask, doffing the august tiara of sincerity. The 'sincere’ 
gentleman’s partner lies in a different and more ingenuous fashion. He deceives 
his author as he deceives his wife, with tricks from the vaudeville stage. The 
secretary of the firm, a blunt and honest man, lies quite simply, like an architect 
who promises that your house will be ready at a date when it will not have been 
begun. The head reader, an angelic soul, flutters from one to another of the three, 
and without knowing what the matter is, gives them, by a brotherly scruple and 
out of affectionate solidarity, the precious support of a word that is above 
suspicion. These four persons live in a state of perpetual dissension to which the 
arrival of the author puts a stop. Over and above their private quarrels, each of 



them remembers the paramount military duty of rallying to the support of the 
threatened ‘corps.’ Without realising it, I had long been playing the part of this 
author among the little band. If Gisele had been thinking, when she used the 
word ‘must,’ of some one of Albertine’s friends who was proposing to go abroad 
with her as soon as my mistress should have found some pretext or other for 
leaving me, and had meant to warn Albertine that the hour had now come or 
would shortly strike, she, Gisele, would have let herself be torn to pieces rather 
than tell me so; it was quite useless therefore to ply her with questions. Meetings 
such as this with Gisele were not alone in accentuating my doubts. For instance, 
I admired Albertine’s sketches. Albertine’s sketches, the touching distractions of 
the captive, moved me so that I congratulated her upon them. “No, they’re 
dreadfully bad, but I’ve never had a drawing lesson in my life.” “But one 
evening at Balbec you sent word to me that you had stayed at home to have a 
drawing lesson.” I reminded her of the day and told her that I had realised at the 
time that people did not have drawing lessons at that hour in the evening. 
Albertine blushed. “It is true,” she said, “I was not having drawing lessons, I told 
you a great many lies at first, that I admit. But I never lie to you now.” I would 
so much have liked to know what were the many lies that she had told me at 
first, but I knew beforehand that her answers would be fresh lies. And so I 
contented myself with kissing her. I asked her to tell me one only of those lies. 
She replied: “Oh, well; for instance when I said that the sea air was bad for me.” 
I ceased to insist in the face of this unwillingness to reveal. 

To make her chain appear lighter, the best thing was no doubt to make her 
believe that I was myself about to break it. In any case, I could not at that 
moment confide this mendacious plan to her, she had been too kind in returning 
from the Trocadero that afternoon; what I could do, far from distressing her with 
the threat of a rupture, was at the most to keep to myself those dreams of a 
perpetual life together which my grateful heart kept forming. As I looked at her, 
I found it hard to restrain myself from pouring them out to her, and she may 
perhaps have noticed this. Unfortunately the expression of such dreams is not 
contagious. The case of an affected old woman like M. de Charlus who, by dint 
of never seeing in his imagination anything but a stalwart young man, thinks that 
he has himself become a stalwart young man, all the more so the more affected 
and ridiculous he becomes, this case is more general, and it is the tragedy of an 
impassioned lover that he does not take into account the fact that while he sees 
in front of him a beautiful face, his mistress is seeing his face which is not made 
any more beautiful, far from it, when it is distorted by the pleasure that is 



aroused in it by the sight of beauty. Nor indeed does love exhaust the whole of 
this case; we do not see our own body, which other people see, and we 'follow 5 
our own thought, the object invisible to other people which is before our eyes. 
This object the artist does sometimes enable us to see in his work. Whence it 
arises that the admirers of his work are disappointed in its author, upon whose 
face that internal beauty is imperfectly reflected. 

Every person whom we love, indeed to a certain extent every person is to us 
like Janus, presenting to us the face that we like if that person leaves us, the 
repellent face if we know him or her to be perpetually at our disposal. In the case 
of Albertine, the prospect of her continued society was painful to me in another 
fashion which I cannot explain in this narrative. It is terrible to have the life of 
another person attached to our own like a bomb which we hold in our hands, 
unable to get rid of it without committing a crime. But let us take as a parallel 
the ups and downs, the dangers, the anxieties, the fear of seeing believed in time 
to come false and probable things which one will not be able then to explain, 
feelings that one experiences if one lives in the intimate society of a madman. 
For instance, I pitied M. de Charlus for living with Morel (immediately the 
memory of the scene that afternoon made me feel the left side of my breast 
heavier than the other); leaving out of account the relations that may or may not 
have existed between them, M. de Charlus must have been unaware at the outset 
that Morel was mad. Morel’s beauty, his stupidity, his pride must have deterred 
the Baron from exploring so deeply, until the days of melancholy when Morel 
accused M. de Charlus of responsibility for his sorrows, without being able to 
furnish any explanation, abused him for his want of confidence, by the aid of 
false but extremely subtle reasoning, threatened him with desperate resolutions, 
while throughout all this there persisted the most cunning regard for his own 
most immediate interests But all this is only a comparison. Albertine was not 
mad. 

I learned that a death had occurred during the day which distressed me 
greatly, that of Bergotte. It was known that he had been ill for a long time past. 
Not, of course, with the illness from which he had suffered originally and which 
was natural. Nature hardly seems capable of giving us any but quite short 
illnesses. But medicine has annexed to itself the art of prolonging them. 
Remedies, the respite that they procure, the relapses that a temporary cessation 
of them provokes, compose a sham illness to which the patient grows so 
accustomed that he ends by making it permanent, just as children continue to 
give way to fits of coughing long after they have been cured of the whooping 



cough. Then remedies begin to have less effect, the doses are increased, they 
cease to do any good, but they have begun to do harm thanks to that lasting 
indisposition. Nature would not have offered them so long a tenure. It is a great 
miracle that medicine can almost equal nature in forcing a man to remain in bed, 
to continue on pain of death the use of some drug. From that moment the illness 
artificially grafted has taken root, has become a secondary but a genuine illness, 
with this difference only that natural illnesses are cured, but never those which 
medicine creates, for it knows not the secret of their cure. 

For years past Bergotte had ceased to go out of doors. Anyhow, he had never 
cared for society, or had cared for it for a day only, to despise it as he despised 
everything else and in the same fashion, which was his own, namely to despise a 
thing not because it was beyond his reach but as soon as he had reached it. He 
lived so simply that nobody suspected how rich he was, and anyone who had 
known would still have been mistaken, for he would have thought him a miser, 
whereas no one was ever more generous. He was generous above all towards 
women — girls, one ought rather to say — who were ashamed to receive so 
much in return for so little. He excused himself in his own eyes because he knew 
that he could never produce such good work as in an atmosphere of amorous 
feelings. Love is too strong a word, pleasure that is at all deeply rooted in the 
flesh is helpful to literary work because it cancels all other pleasures, for 
instance the pleasures of society, those which are the same for everyone. And 
even if this love leads to disillusionment, it does at least stir, even by so doing, 
the surface of the soul which otherwise would be in danger of becoming 
stagnant. Desire is therefore not without its value to the writer in detaching him 
first of all from his fellow men and from conforming to their standards, and 
afterwards in restoring some degree of movement to a spiritual machine which, 
after a certain age, tends to become paralysed. We do not succeed in being happy 
but we make observation of the reasons which prevent us from being happy and 
which would have remained invisible to us but for these loopholes opened by 
disappointment. Dreams are not to be converted into reality, that we know; we 
would not form any, perhaps, were it not for desire, and it is useful to us to form 
them in order to see them fail and to be instructed by their failure. And so 
Bergotte said to himself: “I am spending more than a multimillionaire would 
spend upon girls, but the pleasures or disappointments that they give me make 
me write a book which brings me money.” Economically, this argument was 
absurd, but no doubt he found some charm in thus transmuting gold into caresses 
and caresses into gold. We saw, at the time of my grandmother’s death, how a 



weary old age loves repose. Now in society, there is nothing but conversation. It 
may be stupid, but it has the faculty of suppressing women who are nothing 
more than questions and answers. Removed from society, women become once 
more what is so reposeful to a weary old man, an object of contemplation. In any 
case, it was no longer a question of anything of this sort. I have said that 
Bergotte never went out of doors, and when he got out of bed for an hour in his 
room, he would be smothered in shawls, plaids, all the things with which a 
person covers himself before exposing himself to intense cold or getting into a 
railway train. He would apologise to the few friends whom he allowed to 
penetrate to his sanctuary, and, pointing to his tartan plaids, his travelling-rugs, 
would say merrily: “After all, my dear fellow, life, as Anaxagoras has said, is a 
journey.” Thus he went on growing steadily colder, a tiny planet that offered a 
prophetic image of the greater, when gradually heat will withdraw from the 
earth, then life itself. Then the resurrection will have come to an end, for if, 
among future generations, the works of men are to shine, there must first of all 
be men. If certain kinds of animals hold out longer against the invading chill, 
when there are no longer any men, and if we suppose Bergotte’s fame to have 
lasted so long, suddenly it will be extinguished for all time. It will not be the last 
animals that will read him, for it is scarcely probable that, like the Apostles on 
the Day of Pentecost, they will be able to understand the speech of the various 
races of mankind without having learned it. 

In the months that preceded his death, Bergotte suffered from insomnia, and 
what was worse, whenever he did fall asleep, from nightmares which, if he 
awoke, made him reluctant to go to sleep again. He had long been a lover of 
dreams, even of bad dreams, because thanks to them and to the contradiction 
they present to the reality which we have before us in our waking state, they give 
us, at the moment of waking if not before, the profound sensation of having 
slept. But Bergotte’s nightmares were not like that. When he spoke of 
nightmares, he used in the past to mean unpleasant things that passed through his 
brain. Latterly, it was as though proceeding from somewhere outside himself that 
he would see a hand armed with a damp cloth which, passed over his face by an 
evil woman, kept scrubbing him awake, an intolerable itching in his thighs, the 
rage — because Bergotte had murmured in his sleep that he was driving badly 
— of a raving lunatic of a cabman who flung himself upon the writer, biting and 
gnawing his fingers. Finally, as soon as in his sleep it had grown sufficiently 
dark, nature arranged a sort of undress rehearsal of the apoplectic stroke that was 
to carry him off: Bergotte arrived in a carriage beneath the porch of Swann’s new 



house, and tried to alight. A stunning giddiness glued him to his seat, the porter 
came forward to help him out of the carriage, he remained seated, unable to rise 
— to straighten his legs. He tried to pull himself up with the help of the stone 
pillar that was by his side, but did not find sufficient support in it to enable him 
to stand. 

He consulted doctors who, flattered at being called in by him, saw in his 
virtue as an incessant worker (it was twenty years since he had written anything), 
in his overstrain, the cause of his ailments. They advised him not to read thrilling 
stories (he never read anything), to benefit more by the sunshine, which was 
‘indispensable to life 5 (he had owed a few years of comparative health only to 
his rigorous seclusion indoors), to take nourishment (which made him thinner, 
and nourished nothing but his nightmares). One of his doctors was blessed with 
the spirit of contradiction, and whenever Bergotte consulted him in the absence 
of the others, and, in order not to offend him, suggested to him as his own ideas 
what the others had advised, this doctor, thinking that Bergotte was seeking to 
have prescribed for him something that he himself liked, at once forbade it, and 
often for reasons invented so hurriedly to meet the case that in face of the 
material objections which Bergotte raised, this argumentative doctor was obliged 
in the same sentence to contradict himself, but, for fresh reasons, repeated the 
original prohibition. Bergotte returned to one of the first of these doctors, a man 
who prided himself on his cleverness, especially in the presence of one of the 
leading men of letters, and who, if Bergotte insinuated: “I seem to remember, 
though, that Dr. X — told me — long ago, of course — that that might congest 
my kidneys and brain...” would smile sardonically, raise his finger and enounce: 
“I said use, I did not say abuse. Naturally every remedy, if one takes it in excess, 
becomes a two-edged sword.” There is in the human body a certain instinct for 
what is beneficial to us, as there is in the heart for what is our moral duty, an 
instinct which no authorisation by a Doctor of Medicine or Divinity can replace. 
We know that cold baths are bad for us, we like them, we can always find a 
doctor to recommend them, not to prevent them from doing us harm. From each 
of these doctors Bergotte took something which, in his own wisdom, he had 
forbidden himself for years past. After a few weeks, his old troubles had 
reappeared, the new had become worse. Maddened by an unintermittent pain, to 
which was added insomnia broken only by brief spells of nightmare, Bergotte 
called in no more doctors and tried with success, but to excess, different 
narcotics, hopefully reading the prospectus that accompanied each of them, a 
prospectus which proclaimed the necessity of sleep but hinted that all the 



preparations which induce it (except that contained in the bottle round which the 
prospectus was wrapped, which never produced any toxic effect) were toxic, and 
therefore made the remedy worse than the disease. Bergotte tried them all. Some 
were of a different family from those to which we are accustomed, preparations 
for instance of amyl and ethyl. When we absorb a new drug, entirely different in 
composition, it is always with a delicious expectancy of the unknown. Our heart 
beats as at a first assignation. To what unknown forms of sleep, of dreams, is the 
newcomer going to lead us? He is inside us now, he has the control of our 
thoughts. In what fashion are we going to fall asleep? And, once we are asleep, 
by what strange paths, up to what peaks, into what unfathomed gulfs is he going 
to lead us? With what new grouping of sensations are we to become acquainted 
on this journey? Will it bring us in the end to illness? To blissful happiness? To 
death? Bergotte’s death had come to him overnight, when he had thus entrusted 
himself to one of these friends (a friend? or an enemy, rather?) who proved too 
strong for him. The circumstances of his death were as follows. An attack of 
uraemia, by no means serious, had led to his being ordered to rest. But one of the 
critics having written somewhere that in Vermeer’s Street in Delft (lent by the 
Gallery at The Hague for an Exhibition of Dutch painting), a picture which he 
adored and imagined that he knew by heart, a little patch of yellow wall (which 
he could not remember) was so well painted that it was, if one looked at it by 
itself, like some priceless specimen of Chinese art, of a beauty that was sufficient 
in itself, Bergotte ate a few potatoes, left the house, and went to the exhibition. 
At the first few steps that he had to climb he was overcome by giddiness. He 
passed in front of several pictures and was struck by the stiffness and futility of 
so artificial a school, nothing of which equalled the fresh air and sunshine of a 
Venetian palazzo, or of an ordinary house by the sea. At last he came to the 
Vermeer which he remembered as more striking, more different from anything 
else that he knew, but in which, thanks to the critic’s article, he remarked for the 
first time some small figures in blue, that the ground was pink, and finally the 
precious substance of the tiny patch of yellow wall. His giddiness increased; he 
fixed his eyes, like a child upon a yellow butterfly which it is trying to catch, 
upon the precious little patch of wall. “That is how I ought to have written,” he 
said. “My last books are too dry, I ought to have gone over them with several 
coats of paint, made my language exquisite in itself, like this little patch of 
yellow wall.” Meanwhile he was not unconscious of the gravity of his condition. 
In a celestial balance there appeared to him, upon one of its scales, his own life, 
while the other contained the little patch of wall so beautifully painted in yellow. 



He felt that he had rashly surrendered the former for the latter. “All the same,” 
he said to himself, “I have no wish to provide the 'feature’ of this exhibition for 
the evening papers.” 

He repeated to himself: “Little patch of yellow wall, with a sloping roof, 
little patch of yellow wall.” While doing so he sank down upon a circular divan; 
and then at once he ceased to think that his life was in jeopardy and, reverting to 
his natural optimism, told himself: “It is just an ordinary indigestion from those 
potatoes; they weren’t properly cooked; it is nothing.” A fresh attack beat him 
down; he rolled from the divan to the floor, as visitors and attendants came 
hurrying to his assistance. He was dead. Permanently dead? Who shall say? 
Certainly our experiments in spiritualism prove no more than the dogmas of 
religion that the soul survives death. All that we can say is that everything is 
arranged in this life as though we entered it carrying the burden of obligations 
contracted in a former life; there is no reason inherent in the conditions of life on 
this earth that can make us consider ourselves obliged to do good, to be 
fastidious, to be polite even, nor make the talented artist consider himself 
obliged to begin over again a score of times a piece of work the admiration 
aroused by which will matter little to his body devoured by worms, like the 
patch of yellow wall painted with so much knowledge and skill by an artist who 
must for ever remain unknown and is barely identified under the name Vermeer. 
All these obligations which have not their sanction in our present life seem to 
belong to a different world, founded upon kindness, scrupulosity, self-sacrifice, a 
world entirely different from this, which we leave in order to be born into this 
world, before perhaps returning to the other to live once again beneath the sway 
of those unknown laws which we have obeyed because we bore their precepts in 
our hearts, knowing not whose hand had traced them there — those laws to 
which every profound work of the intellect brings us nearer and which are 
invisible only — and still! — to fools. So that the idea that Bergotte was not 
wholly and permanently dead is by no means improbable. 

They buried him, but all through the night of mourning, in the lighted 
windows, his books arranged three by three kept watch like angels with 
outspread wings and seemed, for him who was no more, the symbol of his 
resurrection. 

I learned, I have said, that day that Bergotte was dead. And I marvelled at 
the carelessness of the newspapers which — each of them reproducing the same 
paragraph — stated that he had died the day before. For, the day before, 
Albertine had met him, as she informed me that very evening, and indeed she 



had been a little late in coming home, for she had stopped for some time talking 
to him. She was doubtless the last person to whom he had spoken. She knew him 
through myself who had long ceased to see him, but, as she had been anxious to 
make his acquaintance, I had, a year earlier, written to ask the old master 
whether I might bring her to see him. He had granted my request, a trifle hurt, I 
fancy, that I should be visiting him only to give pleasure to another person, 
which was a proof of my indifference to himself. These cases are frequent: 
sometimes the man or woman whom we implore to receive us not for the 
pleasure of conversing with them again, but on behalf of a third person, refuses 
so obstinately that our protegee concludes that we have boasted of an influence 
which we do not possess; more often the man of genius or the famous beauty 
consents, but, humiliated in their glory, wounded in their affection, feel for us 
afterwards only a diminished, sorrowful, almost contemptuous attachment. I 
discovered long after this that I had falsely accused the newspapers of 
inaccuracy, since on the day in question Albertine had not met Bergotte, but at 
the time I had never suspected this for a single instant, so naturally had she told 
me of the incident, and it was not until much later that I discovered her charming 
skill in lying with simplicity. The things that she said, the things that she 
confessed were so stamped with the character of formal evidence — what we 
see, what we learn from an unquestionable source — that she sowed thus in the 
empty spaces of her life episodes of another life the falsity of which I did not 
then suspect and began to perceive only at a much later date. I have used the 
word ‘confessed,’ for the following reason. Sometimes a casual meeting gave me 
a jealous suspicion in which by her side there figured in the past, or alas in the 
future, another person. In order to appear certain of my facts, I mentioned the 
person’s name, and Albertine said: “Yes, I met her, a week ago, just outside the 
house. I had to be polite and answer her when she spoke to me. I walked a little 
way with her. But there never has been anything between us. There never will 
be.” Now Albertine had not even met this person, for the simple reason that the 
person had not been in Paris for the last ten months. But my mistress felt that a 
complete denial would sound hardly probable. Whence this imaginary brief 
encounter, related so simply that I could see the lady stop, bid her good day, 
walk a little way with her. The evidence of my senses, if I had been in the street 
at that moment, would perhaps have informed me that the lady had not been with 
Albertine. But if I had knowledge of the fact, it was by one of those chains of 
reasoning in which the words of people in whom we have confidence insert 
strong links, and not by the evidence of my senses. To invoke this evidence of 



the senses I should have had to be in the street at that particular moment, and I 
had not been. We may imagine, however, that such an hypothesis is not 
improbable: I might have gone out, and have been passing along the street at the 
time at which Albertine was to tell me in the evening (not having seen me there) 
that she had gone a little way with the lady, and I should then have known that 
Albertine was lying. But is that quite certain even then? A religious obscurity 
would have clouded my mind, I should have begun to doubt whether I had seen 
her by herself, I should barely have sought to understand by what optical illusion 
I had failed to perceive the lady, and should not have been greatly surprised to 
find myself mistaken, for the stellar universe is not so difficult of comprehension 
as the real actions of other people, especially of the people with whom we are in 
love, strengthened as they are against our doubts by fables devised for their 
protection. For how many years on end can they not allow our apathetic love to 
believe that they have in some foreign country a sister, a brother, a sister-in-law 
who have never existed! 

The evidence of the senses is also an operation of the mind in which 
conviction creates the evidence. We have often seen her sense of hearing convey 
to Fran^oise not the word that was uttered but what she thought to be its correct 
form, which was enough to prevent her from hearing the correction implied in a 
superior pronunciation. Our butler was cast in a similar mould. M. de Charlus 
was in the habit of wearing at this time — for he was constantly changing — 
very light trousers which were recognisable a mile off. Now our butler, who 
thought that the word pissotiere (the word denoting what M. de Rambuteau had 
been so annoyed to hear the Due de Guermantes call a Rambuteau stall) was 
really pistiere, never once in the whole of his life heard a single person say 
pissotiere, albeit the word was frequently pronounced thus in his hearing. But 
error is more obstinate than faith and does not examine the grounds of its belief. 
Constantly the butler would say: “I’m sure M. le Baron de Charlus must have 
caught a disease to stand about as long as he does in a pistiere. That’s what 
comes of running after the girls at his age. You can tell what he is by his 
trousers. This morning, Madame sent me with a message to Neuilly. As I passed 
th epistiere in the Rue de Bourgogne I saw M. le Baron de Charlus go in. When I 
came back from Neuilly, quite an hour later, I saw his yellow trousers in the 
same pistiere, in the same place, in the middle stall where he always goes so that 
people shan’t see him.” I can think of no one more beautiful, more noble or more 
youthful than a certain niece of Mme. de Guermantes. But I have heard the 
porter of a restaurant where I used sometimes to dine say as she went by: “Just 



look at that old trollop, what a style! And she must be eighty, if she’s a day.” As 
far as age went, I find it difficult to believe that he meant what he said. But the 
pages clustered round him, who tittered whenever she went past the hotel on her 
way to visit, at their house in the neighbourhood, her charming great-aunts, 
Mmes. de Fezensac and de Bellery, saw upon the face of the young beauty the 
four-score years with which, seriously or in jest, the porter had endowed the ‘old 
trollop.’ You would have made them shriek with laughter had you told them that 
she was more distinguished than one of the two cashiers of the hotel, who, 
devoured by eczema, ridiculously stout, seemed to them a fine-looking woman. 
Perhaps sexual desire alone would have been capable of preventing their error 
from taking form, if it had been brought to bear upon the passage of the alleged 
old trollop, and if the pages had suddenly begun to covet the young goddess. But 
for reasons unknown, which were most probably of a social nature, this desire 
had not come into play. There is moreover ample room for discussion. The 
universe is true for us all and dissimilar to each of us. If we were not obliged, to 
preserve the continuity of our story, to confine ourselves to frivolous reasons, 
how many more serious reasons would permit us to demonstrate the falsehood 
and flimsiness of the opening pages of this volume in which, from my bed, I 
hear the world awake, now to one sort of weather, now to another. Yes, I have 
been forced to whittle down the facts, and to be a liar, but it is not one universe, 
there are millions, almost as many as the number of human eyes and brains in 
existence, that awake every morning. 

To return to Albertine, I have never known any woman more amply 
endowed than herself with the happy aptitude for a lie that is animated, coloured 
with the selfsame tints of life, unless it be one of her friends — one of my 
blossoming girls also, rose-pink as Albertine, but one whose irregular profile, 
concave in one place, then convex again, was exactly like certain clusters of pink 
flowers the name of which I have forgotten, but which have long and sinuous 
concavities. This girl was, from the point of view of story-telling, superior to 
Albertine, for she never introduced any of those painful moments, those furious 
innuendoes, which were frequent with my mistress. I have said, however, that 
she was charming when she invented a story which left no room for doubt, for 
one saw then in front of her the thing — albeit imaginary — which she was 
saying, using it as an illustration of her speech. Probability alone inspired 
Albertine, never the desire to make me jealous. For Albertine, without perhaps 
any material interest, liked people to be polite to her. And if in the course of this 
work I have had and shall have many occasions to shew how jealousy intensifies 



love, it is the lover’s point of view that I have adopted. But if that lover be only 
the least bit proud, and though he were to die of a separation, he will not respond 
to a supposed betrayal with a courteous speech, he will turn away, or without 
going will order himself to assume a mask of coldness. And so it is entirely to 
her own disadvantage that his mistress makes him suffer so acutely. If, on the 
contrary, she dispels with a tactful word, with loving caresses, the suspicions that 
have been torturing him for all his show of indifference, no doubt the lover does 
not feel that despairing increase of love to which jealousy drives him, but 
ceasing in an instant to suffer, happy, affectionate, relieved from strain as one is 
after a storm when the rain has ceased and one barely hears still splash at long 
intervals from the tall horse-chestnut trees the clinging drops which already the 
reappearing sun has dyed with colour, he does not know how to express his 
gratitude to her who has cured him. Albertine knew that I liked to reward her for 
her kindnesses, and this perhaps explained why she used to invent, to exculpate 
herself, confessions as natural as these stories the truth of which I never doubted, 
one of them being that of her meeting with Bergotte when he was already dead. 
Previously I had never known any of Albertine’s lies save those that, at Balbec 
for instance, Franchise used to report to me, which I have omitted from these 
pages albeit they hurt me so sorely: “As she didn’t want to come, she said to me: 
‘Couldn’t you say to Monsieur that you didn’t find me, that I had gone out?”’ 
But our ‘inferiors,’ who love us as Fran^oise loved me, take pleasure in 
wounding us in our self-esteem. 



Chapter 2 — The Verdurins Quarrel with M. De Charlus 


After dinner, I told Albertine that, since I was out of bed, I might as well 
take the opportunity to go and see some of my friends, Mme. de Villeparisis, 
Mme. de Guermantes, the Cambremers, anyone in short whom I might find at 
home. I omitted to mention only the people whom I did intend to see, the 
Verdurins. I asked her if she would not come with me. She pleaded that she had 
no suitable clothes. “Besides, my hair is so awful. Do you really wish me to go 
on doing it like this?” And by way of farewell she held out her hand to me in that 
abrupt fashion, the arm outstretched, the shoulders thrust back, which she used 
to adopt on the beach at Balbec and had since then entirely abandoned. This 
forgotten gesture retransformed the body which it animated into that of the 
Albertine who as yet scarcely knew me. It restored to Albertine, ceremonious 
beneath an air of rudeness, her first novelty, her strangeness, even her setting. I 
saw the sea behind this girl whom I had never seen shake hands with me in this 
fashion since I was at the seaside. “My aunt thinks it makes me older,” she added 
with a sullen air. “Oh that her aunt may be right!” thought I. “That Albertine by 
looking like a child should make Mme. Bontemps appear younger than she is, is 
all that her aunt would ask, and also that Albertine shall cost her nothing 
between now and the day when, by marrying me, she will repay what has been 
spent on her.” But that Albertine should appear less young, less pretty, should 
turn fewer heads in the street, that is what I, on the contrary, hoped. For the age 
of a duenna is less reassuring to a jealous lover than the age of the woman’s face 
whom he loves. I regretted only that the style in which I had asked her to do her 
hair should appear to Albertine an additional bolt on the door of her prison. And 
it was henceforward this new domestic sentiment that never ceased, even when I 
was parted from Albertine, to form a bond attaching me to her. 

I said to Albertine, who was not dressed, or so she told me, to accompany 
me to the Guermantes’ or the Cambremers’, that I could not be certain where I 
should go, and set off for the Verdurins’. At the moment when the thought of the 
concert that I was going to hear brought back to my mind the scene that 
afternoon: “Grand pied de grue, grand pied de grue ,”— a scene of disappointed 



love, of jealous love perhaps, but if so as bestial as the scene to which a woman 
might be subjected by, so to speak, an orang-outang that was, if one may use the 
expression, in love with her — at the moment when, having reached the street, I 
was just going to hail a cab, I heard the sound of sobs which a man who was 
sitting upon a curbstone was endeavouring to stifle. I came nearer; the man, who 
had buried his face in his hands, appeared to be quite young, and I was surprised 
to see, from the gleam of white in the opening of his cloak, that he was wearing 
evening clothes and a white tie. As he heard my step he uncovered a face bathed 
in tears, but at once, having recognised me, turned away. It was Morel. He 
guessed that I had recognised him and, checking his tears with an effort, told me 
that he had stopped to rest for a moment, he was in such pain. “I have grossly 
insulted, only to-day,” he said, “a person for whom I had the very highest regard. 
It was a cowardly thing to do, for she loves me.” “She will forget perhaps, as 
time goes on,” I replied, without realising that by speaking thus I made it 
apparent that I had overheard the scene that afternoon. But he was so much 
absorbed in his own grief that it never even occurred to him that I might know 
something about the affair. “She may forget, perhaps,” he said. “But I myself can 
never forget. I am too conscious of my degradation, I am disgusted with myself! 
However, what I have said I have said, and nothing can unsay it. When people 
make me lose my temper, I don’t know what I am doing. And it is so bad for me, 
my nerves are all on edge,” for, like all neurasthenics, he was keenly interested 
in his own health. If, during the afternoon, I had witnessed the amorous rage of 
an infuriated animal, this evening, within a few hours, centuries had elapsed and 
a fresh sentiment, a sentiment of shame, regret, grief, shewed that a great stage 
had been passed in the evolution of the beast destined to be transformed into a 
human being. Nevertheless, I still heard ringing in my ears his ‘grand pied de 
grue’ and dreaded an imminent return to the savage state. I had only a very 
vague impression, however, of what had been happening, and this was but 
natural, for M. de Charlus himself was totally unaware that for some days past, 
and especially that day, even before the shameful episode which was not a direct 
consequence of the violinist’s condition, Morel had been suffering from a 
recurrence of his neurasthenia. As a matter of fact, he had, in the previous 
month, proceeded as rapidly as he had been able, a great deal less rapidly than he 
would have liked, towards the seduction of Jupien’s niece with whom he was at 
liberty, now that they were engaged, to go out whenever he chose. But whenever 
he had gone a trifle far in his attempts at violation, and especially when he 
suggested to his betrothed that she might make friends with other girls whom she 



would then procure for himself, he had met with a resistance that made him 
furious. All at once (whether she would have proved too chaste, or on the 
contrary would have surrendered herself) his desire had subsided. He had 
decided to break with her, but feeling that the Baron, vicious as he might be, was 
far more moral than himself, he was afraid lest, in the event of a rupture, M. de 
Charlus might turn him out of the house. And so he had decided, a fortnight ago, 
that he would not see the girl again, would leave M. de Charlus and Jupien to 
clean up the mess (he employed a more realistic term) by themselves, and, 
before announcing the rupture, to ‘b-off’ to an unknown destination. 

For all that his conduct towards Jupien’s niece coincided exactly, in its 
minutest details, with the plan of conduct which he had outlined to the Baron as 
they were dining together at Saint-Mars le Vetu, it is probable that his intention 
was entirely different, and that sentiments of a less atrocious nature, which he 
had not foreseen in his theory of conduct, had improved, had tinged it with 
sentiment in practice. The sole point in which, on the contrary, the practice was 
worse than the theory is this, that in theory it had not appeared to him possible 
that he could remain in Paris after such an act of betrayal. Now, on the contrary, 

actually to ‘b-off’ for so small a matter seemed to him quite unnecessary. 

It meant leaving the Baron who would probably be furious, and forfeiting his 
own position. He would lose all the money that the Baron was now giving him. 
The thought that this was inevitable made his nerves give away altogether, he 
cried for hours on end, and in order not to think about it any more dosed himself 
cautiously with morphine. Then suddenly he hit upon an idea which no doubt 
had gradually been taking shape in his mind and gaining strength there for some 
time, and this was that a rupture with the girl would not inevitably mean a 
complete break with M. de Charlus. To lose all the Baron’s money was a serious 
thing in itself. Morel in his uncertainty remained for some days a prey to dark 
thoughts, such as came to him at the sight of Bloch. Then he decided that Jupien 
and his niece had been trying to set a trap for him, that they might consider 
themselves lucky to be rid of him so cheaply. He found in short that the girl had 
been in the wrong in being so clumsy, in not having managed to keep him 
attached to her by a sensual attraction. Not only did the sacrifice of his position 
with M. de Charlus seem to him absurd, he even regretted the expensive dinners 
he had given the girl since they became engaged, the exact cost of which he 
knew by heart, being a true son of the valet who used to bring his 'book’ every 
month for my uncle’s inspection. For the word book, in the singular, which 
means a printed volume to humanity in general, loses that meaning among Royal 



Princes and servants. To the latter it means their housekeeping book, to the 
former the register in which we inscribe our names. (At Balbec one day when 
the Princesse de Luxembourg told me that she had not brought a book with her, I 
was about to offer her Le Pecheur d’Islande and Tartarm de Tarascon, when I 
realised that she had meant not that she would pass the time less agreeably, but 
that I should find it more difficult to pay a call upon her.) 

Notwithstanding the change in Morel’s point of view with regard to the 
consequences of his behaviour, albeit that behaviour would have seemed to him 
abominable two months earlier, when he was passionately in love with Jupien’s 
niece, whereas during the last fortnight he had never ceased to assure himself 
that the same behaviour was natural, praiseworthy, it continued to intensify the 
state of nervous unrest in which, finally, he had announced the rupture that 
afternoon. And he was quite prepared to vent his anger, if not (save in a 
momentary outburst) upon the girl, for whom he still felt that lingering fear, the 
last trace of love, at any rate upon the Baron. He took care, however, not to say 
anything to him before dinner, for, valuing his own professional skill above 
everything, whenever he had any difficult music to play (as this evening at the 
Verdurins’) he avoided (as far as possible, and the scene that afternoon was 
already more than ample) anything that might impair the flexibility of his wrists. 
Similarly a surgeon who is an enthusiastic motorist, does not drive when he has 
an operation to perform. This accounts to me for the fact that, while he was 
speaking to me, he kept bending his fingers gently one after another to see 
whether they had regained their suppleness. A slight frown seemed to indicate 
that there was still a trace of nervous stiffness. But, so as not to increase it, he 
relaxed his features, as we forbid ourself to grow irritated at not being able to 
sleep or to prevail upon a woman, for fear lest our rage itself may retard the 
moment of sleep or of satisfaction. And so, anxious to regain his serenity so that 
he might, as was his habit, absorb himself entirely in what he was going to play 
at the Verdurins’, and anxious, so long as I was watching him, to let me see how 
unhappy he was, he decided that the simplest course was to beg me to leave him 
immediately. His request was superfluous, and it was a relief to me to get away 
from him. I had trembled lest, as we were due at the same house, within a few 
minutes, he might ask me to take him with me, my memory of the scene that 
afternoon being too vivid not to give me a certain distaste for the idea of having 
Morel by my side during the drive. It is quite possible that the love, and 
afterwards the indifference or hatred felt by Morel for Jupien’s niece had been 
sincere. Unfortunately, it was not the first time that he had behaved thus, that he 



had suddenly ‘dropped’ a girl to whom he had sworn undying love, going so far 
as to produce a loaded revolver, telling her that he would blow out his brains if 
ever he was mean enough to desert her. He did nevertheless desert her in time, 
and felt instead of remorse, a sort of rancour against her. It was not the first time 
that he had behaved thus, it was not to be the last, with the result that the heads 
of many girls — girls less forgetful of him than he was of them — suffered — as 
Jupien’s niece’s head continued long afterwards to suffer, still in love with Morel 
although she despised him — suffered, ready to burst with the shooting of an 
internal pain because in each of them — like a fragment of a Greek carving — 
an aspect of Morel’s face, hard as marble and beautiful as an antique sculpture, 
was embedded in her brain, with his blossoming hair, his fine eyes, his straight 
nose, forming a protuberance in a cranium not shaped to receive it, upon which 
no operation was possible. But in the fulness of time these stony fragments end 
by slipping into a place where they cause no undue discomfort, from which they 
never stir again; we are no longer conscious of their presence: I mean 
forgetfulness, or an indifferent memory. 

Meanwhile I had gained two things in the course of the day. On the one 
hand, thanks to the calm that was produced in me by Albertine’s docility, I found 
it possible, and therefore made up my mind, to break with her. There was on the 
other hand, the fruit of my reflexions during the interval that I had spent waiting 
for her, at the piano, the idea that Art, to which I would try to devote my 
reconquered liberty, was not a thing that justified one in making a sacrifice, a 
thing above and beyond life, that did not share in its fatuity and futility; the 
appearance of real individuality obtained in works of art being due merely to the 
illusion created by the artist’s technical skill. If my afternoon had left behind it 
other deposits, possibly more profound, they were not to come to my knowledge 
until much later. As for the two which I was able thus to weigh, they were not to 
be permanent; for, from this very evening my ideas about art were to rise above 
the depression to which they had been subjected in the afternoon, while on the 
other hand my calm, and consequently the freedom that would enable me to 
devote myself to it, was once again to be withdrawn from me. 

As my cab, following the line of the embankment, was coming near the 
Verdurins’ house, I made the driver pull up. I had just seen Brichot alighting 
from the tram at the foot of the Rue Bonaparte, after which he dusted his shoes 
with an old newspaper and put on a pair of pearl grey gloves. I went up to him 
on foot. For some time past, his sight having grown steadily weaker, he had been 
endowed — as richly as an observatory — with new spectacles of a powerful 



and complicated kind, which, like astronomical instruments, seemed to be 
screwed into his eyes; he focussed their exaggerated blaze upon myself and 
recognised me. They — the spectacles — were in marvellous condition. But 
behind them I could see, minute, pallid, convulsive, expiring, a remote gaze 
placed under this powerful apparatus, as, in a laboratory equipped out of all 
proportion to the work that is done in it, you may watch the last throes of some 
insignificant animalcule through the latest and most perfect type of microscope. I 
offered him my arm to guide him on his way. “This time it is not by great 
Cherbourg that we meet,” he said to me, “but by little Dunkerque,” a remark 
which I found extremely tiresome, as I failed to understand what he meant; and 
yet I dared not ask Brichot, dreading not so much his scorn as his explanations. I 
replied that I was longing to see the room in which Swann used to meet Odette 
every evening. “What, so you know that old story, do you?” he said. “And yet 
from those days to the death of Swann is what the poet rightly calls: ‘Grande 
spatium mortalis aevi”’ 

The death of Swann had been a crushing blow to me at the time. The death 
of Swann! Swann, in this phrase, is something more than a noun in the 
possessive case. I mean by it his own particular death, the death allotted by 
destiny to the service of Swann. For we talk of ‘death’ for convenience, but there 
are almost as many different deaths as there are people. We are not equipped 
with a sense that would enable us to see, moving at every speed in every 
direction, these deaths, the active deaths aimed by destiny at this person or that. 
Often there are deaths that will not be entirely relieved of their duties until two 
or even three years later. They come in haste to plant a tumour in the side of a 
Swann, then depart to attend to their other duties, returning only when, the 
surgeons having performed their operation, it is necessary to plant the tumour 
there afresh. Then comes the moment when we read in the Gaulois that Swann’s 
health has been causing anxiety but that he is now making an excellent recovery. 
Then, a few minutes before the breath leaves our body, death, like a sister of 
charity who has come to nurse, rather than to destroy us, enters to preside over 
our last moments, crowns with a supreme halo the cold and stiffening creature 
whose heart has ceased to beat. And it is this diversity among deaths, the 
mystery of their circuits, the colour of their fatal badge, that makes so impressive 
a paragraph in the newspapers such as this: 

“We regret to learn that M. Charles Swann passed away yesterday at his 
residence in Paris, after a long and painful illness. A Parisian whose intellectual 
gifts were widely appreciated, a discriminating but steadfastly loyal friend, he 



will be universally regretted, in those literary and artistic circles where the 
soundness and refinement of his taste made him a willing and a welcome guest, 
as well as at the Jockey Club of which he was one of the oldest and most 
respected members. He belonged also to the Union and Agricole. He had 
recently resigned his membership of the Rue Royale. His personal appearance 
and eminently distinguished bearing never failed to arouse public interest at all 
the great events of the musical and artistic seasons, especially at private views, at 
which he was a regular attendant until, during the last years of his life, he 
became almost entirely confined to the house. The funeral will take place, etc.” 

From this point of view, if one is not 'somebody/ the absence of a well 
known title makes the process of decomposition even more rapid. No doubt it is 
more or less anonymously, without any personal identity, that a man still remains 
Due d’Uzes. But the ducal coronet does for some time hold the elements 
together, as their moulds keep together those artistically designed ices which 
Albertine admired, whereas the names of ultra-fashionable commoners, as soon 
as they are dead, dissolve and lose their shape. We have seen M. de Breaute 
speak of Cartier as the most intimate friend of the Due de La Tremoille, as a man 
greatly in demand in aristocratic circles. To a later generation, Cartier has 
become something so formless that it would almost be adding to his importance 
to make him out as related to the jeweller Cartier, with whom he would have 
smiled to think that anybody could be so ignorant as to confuse him! Swann on 
the contrary was a remarkable personality, in both the intellectual and the artistic 
worlds; and even although he had ‘produced’ nothing, still he had a chance of 

surviving a little longer. And yet, my dear Charles-, whom I used to know 

when I was still so young and you were nearing your grave, it is because he 
whom you must have regarded as a little fool has made you the hero of one of 
his volumes that people are beginning to speak of you again and that your name 
will perhaps live. If in Tissot’s picture representing the balcony of the Rue 
Royale club, where you figure with Galliffet, Edmond Polignac and Saint- 
Maurice, people are always drawing attention to yourself, it is because they 
know that there are some traces of you in the character of Swann. 

To return to more general realities, it was of this foretold and yet unforeseen 
death of Swann that I had heard him speak himself to the Duchesse de 
Guermantes, on the evening of her cousin’s party. It was the same death whose 
striking and specific strangeness had recurred to me one evening when, as I ran 
my eye over the newspaper, my attention was suddenly arrested by the 
announcement of it, as though traced in mysterious lines interpolated there out of 



place. They had sufficed to make of a living man some one who can never again 
respond to what you say to him, to reduce him to a mere name, a written name, 
that has passed in a moment from the real world to the realm of silence. It was 
they that even now made me anxious to make myself familiar with the house in 
which the Verdurins had lived, and where Swann, who at that time was not 
merely a row of five letters printed in a newspaper, had dined so often with 
Odette. I must add also (and this is what for a long time made Swann’s death 
more painful than any other, albeit these reasons bore no relation to the 
individual strangeness of his death) that I had never gone to see Gilberte, as I 
promised him at the Princesse de Guermantes’s, that he had never told me what 
the ‘other reason’ was, to which he alluded that evening, for his selecting me as 
the recipient of his conversation with the Prince, that a thousand questions 
occurred to me (as bubbles rise from the bottom of a pond) which I longed to ask 
him about the most different subjects: Vermeer, M. de Mouchy, Swann himself, a 
Boucher tapestry, Combray, questions that doubtless were not very vital since I 
had put off asking them from day to day, but which seemed to me of capital 
importance now that, his lips being sealed, no answer would ever come. 

“No,” Brichot went on, “it was not here that Swann met his future wife, or 
rather it was here only in the very latest period, after the disaster that partially 
destroyed Mme. Verdurin’s former home.” 

Unfortunately, in my fear of displaying before the eyes of Brichot an 
extravagance which seemed to me out of place, since the professor had no share 
in its enjoyment, I had alighted too hastily from the carriage and the driver had 
not understood the words I had flung at him over my shoulder in order that I 
might be well clear of the carriage before Brichot caught sight of me. The 
consequence was that the driver followed us and asked me whether he was to 
call for me later; I answered hurriedly in the affirmative, and was regarded with 
a vastly increased respect by the professor who had come by omnibus. 

“Ah! So you were in a carriage,” he said in solemn tones. “Only by the 
purest accident. I never take one as a rule. I always travel by omnibus or on foot. 
However, it may perhaps entitle me to the great honour of taking you home to¬ 
night if you will oblige me by consenting to enter that rattletrap; we shall be 
packed rather tight. But you are always so considerate to me.” Alas, in making 
him this offer, I am depriving myself of nothing (I reflected) since in any case I 
shall be obliged to go home for Albertine’s sake. Her presence in my house, at 
an hour when nobody could possibly call to see her, allowed me to dispose as 
freely of my time as I had that afternoon, when, seated at the piano, I knew that 



she was on her way back from the Trocadero and that I was in no hurry to see 
her again. But furthermore, as also in the afternoon, I felt that I had a woman in 
the house and that on returning home I should not taste the fortifying thrill of 
solitude. “I accept with great good will,” replied Brichot. “At the period to which 
you allude, our friends occupied in the Rue Montalivet a magnificent ground 
floor apartment with an upper landing, and a garden behind, less sumptuous of 
course, and yet to my mind preferable to the old Venetian Embassy.” Brichot 
informed me that this evening there was to be at ‘Quai Conti’ (thus it was that 
the faithful spoke of the Verdurin drawing-room since it had been transferred to 
that address) a great musical ‘tow-row-row’ got up by M. de Charlus. He went 
on to say that in the old days to which I had referred, the little nucleus had been 
different, and its tone not at all the same, not only because the faithful had then 
been younger. He told me of elaborate jokes played by Elstir (what he called 
‘pure buffooneries’), as for instance one day when the painter, having pretended 
to fail at the last moment, had come disguised as an extra waiter and, as he 
handed round the dishes, whispered gallant speeches in the ear of the extremely 
proper Baroness Putbus, crimson with anger and alarm; then disappearing before 
the end of dinner he had had a hip-bath carried into the drawing-room, out of 
which, when the party left the table, he had emerged stark naked uttering fearful 
oaths; and also of supper parties to which the guests came in paper costumes, 
designed, cut out and coloured by Elstir, which were masterpieces in themselves, 
Brichot having worn on one occasion that of a great nobleman of the court of 
Charles VII, with long turned-up points to his shoes, and another time that of 
Napoleon I, for which Elstir had fashioned a Grand Cordon of the Legion of 
Honour out of sealing-wax. In short Brichot, seeing again with the eyes of 
memory the drawing-room of those days with its high windows, its low sofas 
devoured by the midday sun which had had to be replaced, declared that he 
preferred it to the drawing-room of to-day. Of course, I quite understood that by 
‘drawing-room’ Brichot meant — as the word church implies not merely the 
religious edifice but the congregation of worshippers — not merely the 
apartment, but the people who visited it, the special pleasures that they came to 
enjoy there, to which, in his memory, those sofas had imparted their form upon 
which, when you called to see Mme. Verdurin in the afternoon, you waited until 
she was ready, while the blossom on the horse chestnuts outside, and on the 
mantelpiece carnations in vases seemed, with a charming and kindly thought for 
the visitor expressed in the smiling welcome of their rosy hues, to be watching 
anxiously for the tardy appearance of the lady of the house. But if the drawing- 



room seemed to him superior to what it was now, it was perhaps because our 
mind is the old Proteus who cannot remain the slave of any one shape and, even 
in the social world, suddenly abandons a house which has slowly and with 
difficulty risen to the pitch of perfection to prefer another which is less brilliant, 
just as the ‘touched-up’ photographs which Odette had had taken at Otto’s, in 
which she queened it in a ‘princess’ gown, her hair waved by Lentheric, did not 
appeal to Swann so much as a little ‘cabinet picture’ taken at Nice, in which, in a 
cloth cape, her loosely dressed hair protruding beneath a straw hat trimmed with 
pansies and a bow of black ribbon, instead of being twenty years younger (for 
women as a rule look all the older in a photograph, the earlier it is), she looked 
like a little servant girl twenty years older than she now was. Perhaps too he 
derived some pleasure from praising to me what I myself had never known, from 
shewing me that he had tasted delights that I could never enjoy. If so, he was 
successful, for merely by mentioning the names of two or three people who were 
no longer alive and to each of whom he imparted something mysterious by his 
way of referring to them, to that delicious intimacy, he made me ask myself what 
it could have been like; I felt that everything that had been told me about the 
Verdurins was far too coarse; and indeed, in the case of Swann whom I had 
known, I reproached myself with not having paid him sufficient attention, with 
not having paid attention to him in a sufficiently disinterested spirit, with not 
having listened to him properly when he used to entertain me while we waited 
for his wife to come home for luncheon and he shewed me his treasures, now 
that I knew that he was to be classed with the most brilliant talkers of the past. 
Just as we were coming to Mme. Verdurin’s doorstep, I caught sight of M. de 
Charlus, steering towards us the bulk of his huge body, drawing unwillingly in 
his wake one of those blackmailers or mendicants who nowadays, whenever he 
appeared, sprang up without fail even in what were to all appearance the most 
deserted corners, by whom this powerful monster was, evidently against his will, 
invariably escorted, although at a certain distance, as is the shark by its pilot, in 
short contrasting so markedly with the haughty stranger of my first visit to 
Balbec, with his stern aspect, his affectation of virility, that I seemed to be 
discovering, accompanied by its satellite, a planet at a wholly different period of 
its revolution, when one begins to see it full, or a sick man now devoured by the 
malady which a few years ago was but a tiny spot which was easily concealed 
and the gravity of which was never suspected. Although the operation that 
Brichot had undergone had restored a tiny portion of the sight which he had 
thought to be lost for ever, I do not think he had observed the ruffian following 



in the Baron’s steps. Not that this mattered, for, ever since la Raspeliere, and 
notwithstanding the professor’s friendly regard for M. de Charlus, the sight of 
the latter always made him feel ill at ease. No doubt to every man the life of 
every other extends along shadowy paths which he does not suspect. Falsehood, 
however, so often treacherous, upon which all conversation is based, conceals 
less perfectly a feeling of hostility, or of sordid interest, or a visit which we wish 
to look as though we had not paid, or an escapade with the mistress of a day 
which we are anxious to keep from our wife, than a good reputation covers up — 
so as not to let their existence be guessed — evil habits. They may remain 
unknown to us for a lifetime; an accidental encounter upon a pier, at night, will 
disclose them; even then this accidental discovery is frequently misunderstood 
and we require a third person, who is in the secret, to supply the unimaginable 
clue of which everyone is unaware. But, once we know about them, they alarm 
us because we feel that that way madness lies, far more than by their immorality. 
Mme. de Surgis did not possess the slightest trace of any moral feeling, and 
would have admitted anything of her sons that could be degraded and explained 
by material interest, which is comprehensible to all mankind! But she forbade 
them to go on visiting M. de Charlus when she learned that, by a sort of internal 
clockwork, he was inevitably drawn upon each of their visits, to pinch their 
chins and to make each of them pinch his brother’s. She felt that uneasy sense of 
a physical mystery which makes us ask ourself whether the neighbour with 
whom we have been on friendly terms is not tainted with cannibalism, and to the 
Baron’s repeated inquiry: “When am I going to see your sons again?” she would 
reply, conscious of the thunderbolts that she was attracting to her defenceless 
head, that they were very busy working for examinations, preparing to go 
abroad, and so forth. Irresponsibility aggravates faults, and even crimes, 
whatever anyone may say. Landru (assuming that he really did kill his wives) if 
he did so from a financial motive, which it is possible to resist, may be pardoned, 
but not if his crime was due to an irresistible Sadism. 

Brichot’s coarse pleasantries, in the early days of his friendship with the 
Baron, had given place, as soon as it was a question, not of uttering 
commonplaces, but of understanding, to an awkward feeling which concealed a 
certain merriment. He reassured himself by recalling pages of Plato, lines of 
Virgil, because, being mentally as well as physically blind, he did not understand 
that in those days to fall in love with a young man was like, in our day 
(Socrates’s jokes reveal this more clearly than Plato’s theories), keeping a 
dancing girl before one marries and settles down. M. de Charlus himself would 



not have understood, he who confused his mania with friendship, which does not 
resemble it in the least, and the athletes of Praxiteles with obliging boxers. He 
refused to see that for the last nineteen hundred years (“a pious courtier under a 
pious prince would have been an atheist under an atheist prince,” as Labruyere 
reminds us) all conventional homosexuality — that of Plato’s young friends as 
well as that of Virgil’s shepherds — has disappeared, that what survives and 
increases is only the involuntary, the neurotic kind, which we conceal from other 
people and disguise to ourselves. And M. de Charlus would have been wrong in 
not denying frankly the pagan genealogy. In exchange for a little plastic beauty, 
how vast the moral superiority! The shepherd in Theocritus who sighs for love 
of a boy, later on will have no reason to be less hard of heart, less dull of wit than 
the other shepherd whose flute sounds for Amaryllis. For the former is not 
suffering from a malady, he is conforming to the customs of his time. It is the 
homosexuality that survives in spite of obstacles, a thing of scorn and loathing, 
that is the only true form, the only form that can be found conjoined in a person 
with an enhancement of his moral qualities. We are appalled at the apparently 
close relation between these and our bodily attributes, when we think of the 
slight dislocation of a purely physical taste, the slight blemish in one of the 
senses, which explain why the world of poets and musicians, so firmly barred 
against the Due de Guermantes, opens its portals to M. de Charlus. That the 
latter should shew taste in the furnishing of his home, which is that of an eclectic 
housewife, need not surprise us; but the narrow loophole that opens upon 
Beethoven and Veronese! This does not exempt the sane from a feeling of alarm 
when a madman who has composed a sublime poem, after explaining to them in 
the most logical fashion that he has been shut up by mistake, through his wife’s 
machinations, imploring them to intercede for him with the governor of the 
asylum, complaining of the promiscuous company that is forced upon him, 
concludes as follows: “You see that man who is waiting to speak to me on the 
lawn, whom I am obliged to put up with; he thinks that he is Jesus Christ. That 
alone will shew you the sort of lunatics that I have to live among; he cannot be 
Christ, for I am Christ myself!” A moment earlier, you were on the point of 
going to assure the governor that a mistake had been made. At this final speech, 
even if you bear in mind the admirable poem at which this same man is working 
every day, you shrink from him, as Mme. de Surgis’s sons shrank from M. de 
Charlus, not that he would have done them any harm, but because of his 
ceaseless invitations, the ultimate purpose of which was to pinch their chins. The 
poet is to be pitied, who must, with no Virgil to guide him, pass through the 



circles of an inferno of sulphur and brimstone, to cast himself into the fire that 
falls from heaven, in order to rescue a few of the inhabitants of Sodom! No 
charm in his work; the same severity in his life as in those of the unfrocked 
priests who follow the strictest rule of celibacy so that no one may be able to 
ascribe to anything but loss of faith their discarding of the cassock. 

Making a pretence of not seeing the seedy individual who was following in 
his wake (whenever the Baron ventured into the Boulevards or crossed the 
waiting-room in Saint-Lazarre station, these followers might be counted by the 
dozen who, in the hope of ‘touching him for a dollar,’ never let him out of their 
sight), and afraid at the same time that the other might have the audacity to 
accost him, the Baron had devoutly lowered his darkened eyelids which, in 
contrast to his rice-powdered cheeks, gave him the appearance of a Grand 
Inquisitor painted by El Greco. But this priestly expression caused alarm, and he 
looked like an unfrocked priest, various compromises to which he had been 
driven by the need to apologise for his taste and to keep it secret having had the 
effect of bringing to the surface of his face precisely what the Baron sought to 
conceal, a debauched life indicated by moral decay. This last, indeed, whatever 
be its cause, is easily detected, for it is never slow in taking bodily form and 
proliferates upon a face, especially on the cheeks and round the eyes, as 
physically as the ochreous yellows accumulate there in a case of jaundice or 
repulsive reds in a case of skin disease. Nor was it merely in the cheeks, or rather 
the chaps of this painted face, in the mammiferous chest, the aggressive rump of 
this body allowed to deteriorate and invaded by obesity, upon which there now 
floated iridescent as a film of oil, the vice at one time so jealously confined by 
M. de Charlus in the most secret chamber of his heart. Now it overflowed in all 
his speech. 

“So this is how you prowl the streets at night, Brichot, with a good-looking 
young man,” he said as he joined us, while the disappointed ruffian made off. “A 
fine example. We must tell your young pupils at the Sorbonne that this is how 
you behave. But, I must say, the society of youth seems to be good for you, 
Monsieur le Professeur, you are as fresh as a rosebud. I have interrupted you, 
you looked as though you were enjoying yourselves like a pair of giddy girls, 
and had no need of an old Granny Killjoy like myself. I shan’t take it to the 
confessional, since you are almost at your destination.” The Baron’s mood was 
all the more blithe since he knew nothing whatever about the scene that 
afternoon, Jupien having decided that it was better to protect his niece against a 
repetition of the onslaught than to inform M. de Charlus. And so the Baron was 



still looking forward to the marriage, and delighting in the thought of it. One 
would suppose that it is a consolation to these great solitaries to give their tragic 
celibacy the relief of a fictitious fatherhood. “But, upon my word, Brichot,” he 
went on, turning with a laugh to gaze at us, “I feel quite awkward when I see you 
in such gallant company. You were like a pair of lovers. Going along arm in arm, 
I say, Brichot, you do go the pace!” Ought one to ascribe this speech to the 
senility of a particular state of mind, less capable than in the past of controlling 
its reflexes, which in moments of automatism lets out a secret that has been so 
carefully hidden for forty years? Or rather to that contempt for plebeian opinion 
which all the Guermantes felt in their hearts, and of which M. de Charlus’s 
brother, the Duke, was displaying a variant form when, regardless of the fact that 
my mother could see him, he used to shave standing by his bedroom window in 
his unbuttoned nightshirt. Had M. de Charlus contracted, during the roasting 
journeys between Doncieres and Douville, the dangerous habit of making 
himself at ease, and, just as he would push back his straw hat in order to cool his 
huge forehead, of unfastening — at first, for a few moments only — the mask 
that for too long had been rigorously imposed upon his true face? His conjugal 
attitude towards Morel might well have astonished anyone who had observed it 
in its full extent. But M. de Charlus had reached the stage when the monotony of 
the pleasures that his vice has to offer became wearying. He had sought 
instinctively for novel displays, and, growing tired of the strangers whom he 
picked up, had passed to the opposite pole, to what he used to imagine that he 
would always loathe, the imitation of family life, or of fatherhood. Sometimes 
even this did not suffice him, he required novelty, and would go and spend the 
night with a woman, just as a normal man may, once in his life, have wished to 
go to bed with a boy, from a curiosity similar though inverse, and in either case 
equally unhealthy. The Baron’s existence as one of the 'faithful,’ living, for 
Charlie’s sake, entirely among the little clan, had had, in stultifying the efforts 
that he had been making for years to keep up lying appearances, the same 
influence that a voyage of exploration or residence in the colonies has upon 
certain Europeans who discard the ruling principles by which they were guided 
at home. And yet, the internal revolution of a mind, ignorant at first of the 
anomaly contained in its body, then appalled at it after the discovery, and finally 
growing so used to it as to fail to perceive that it is not safe to confess to other 
people what the sinner has come in time to confess without shame to himself, 
had been even more effective in liberating M. de Charlus from the last vestiges 
of social constraint than the time that he spent at the Verdurins’. No banishment, 



indeed, to the South Pole, or to the summit of Mont Blanc, can separate us so 
entirely from our fellow creatures as a prolonged residence in the seclusion of a 
secret vice, that is to say of a state of mind that is different from theirs. A vice 
(so M. de Charlus used at one time to style it) to which the Baron now gave the 
genial aspect of a mere failing, extremely common, attractive on the whole and 
almost amusing, like laziness, absent-mindedness or greed. Conscious of the 
curiosity that his own striking personality aroused, M. de Charlus derived a 
certain pleasure from satisfying, whetting, sustaining it. Just as a Jewish 
journalist will come forward day after day as the champion of Catholicism, not, 
probably, with any hope of being taken seriously, but simply in order not to 
disappoint the good-natured amusement of his readers, M. de Charlus would 
genially denounce evil habits among the little clan, as he would have mimicked a 
person speaking English or imitated Mounet-Sully, without waiting to be asked, 
so as to pay his scot with a good grace, by displaying an amateur talent in 
society; so that M. de Charlus now threatened Brichot that he would report to the 
Sorbonne that he was in the habit of walking about with young men, exactly as 
the circumcised scribe keeps referring in and out of season to the 'Eldest 
Daughter of the Church’ and the ‘Sacred Heart of Jesus,’ that is to say without 
the least trace of hypocrisy, but with a distinctly histrionic effect. It was not only 
the change in the words themselves, so different from those that he allowed 
himself to use in the past, that seemed to require some explanation, there was 
also the change that had occurred in his intonations, his gestures, all of which 
now singularly resembled the type M. de Charlus used most fiercely to castigate; 
he would now utter unconsciously almost the same little cries (unconscious in 
him, and all the more deep-rooted) as are uttered consciously by the inverts who 
refer to one another as ‘she’; as though this deliberate ‘camping,’ against which 
M. de Charlus had for so long set his face, were after all merely a brilliant and 
faithful imitation of the manner that men of the Charlus type, whatever they may 
say, are compelled to adopt when they have reached a certain stage in their 
malady, just as sufferers from general paralysis or locomotor ataxia inevitably 
end by displaying certain symptoms. As a matter of fact — and this is what this 
purely unconscious ‘camping’ revealed — the difference between the stern 
Charlus, dressed all in black, with his stiffly brushed hair, whom I had known, 
and the painted young men, loaded with rings, was no more than the purely 
imaginary difference that exists between an excited person who talks fast, keeps 
moving all the time, and a neurotic who talks slowly, preserves a perpetual 
phlegm, but is tainted with the same neurasthenia in the eyes of the physician 



who knows that each of the two is devoured by the same anguish and marred by 
the same defects. At the same time one could tell that M. de Charlus had aged 
from wholly different signs, such as the extraordinary frequency in his 
conversation of certain expressions that had taken root in it and used now to crop 
up at every moment (for instance: ‘the chain of circumstances’) upon which the 
Baron’s speech leaned in sentence after sentence as upon a necessary prop. “Is 
Charlie here yet?” Brichot asked M. de Charlus as we came in sight of the door. 
“Oh, I don’t know,” said the Baron, raising his arms and half-shutting his eyes 
with the air of a person who does not wish anyone to accuse him of being 
indiscreet, all the more so as he had probably been reproached by Morel for 
things which he had said and which the other, as timorous as he was vain, and as 
ready to deny M. de Charlus as he was to boast of his friendship, had considered 
serious albeit they were quite unimportant. “You know, he never tells me what 
he’s going to do.” If the conversations of two people bound by a tie of intimacy 
are full of falsehood, this occurs no less spontaneously in the conversations that 
a third person holds with a lover on the subject of the person with whom the 
latter is in love, whatever be the sex of that person. 

“Have you seen him lately?” I asked M. de Charlus, with the object of 
seeming at once not to be afraid of mentioning Morel to him and not to believe 
that they were actually living together. “He came in, as it happened, for five 
minutes this morning while I was still half asleep, and sat down on the side of 
my bed, as though he wanted to ravish me.” I guessed at once that M. de Charlus 
had seen Charlie within the last hour, for if we ask a woman when she last saw 
the man whom we know to be — and whom she may perhaps suppose that we 
suspect of being — her lover, if she has just taken tea with him, she replies: “I 
saw him for an instant before luncheon.” Between these two incidents the only 
difference is that one is false and the other true, but both are equally innocent, or, 
if you prefer it, equally culpable. And so we should be unable to understand why 
the mistress (in this case, M. de Charlus) always chooses the false version, did 
we not know that such replies are determined, unknown to the person who utters 
them, by a number of factors which appear so out of proportion to the triviality 
of the incident that we do not take the trouble to consider them. But to a 
physicist the space occupied by the tiniest ball of pith is explained by the 
harmony of action, the conflict or equilibrium, of laws of attraction or repulsion 
which govern far greater worlds. Just as many different laws acting in opposite 
directions dictate the more general responses with regard to the innocence, the 
‘platonism,’ or on the contrary the carnal reality of the relations that one has with 



the person whom one says one saw in the morning when one has seen him or her 
in the evening. Here we need merely record, without pausing to consider them, 
the desire to appear natural and fearless, the instinctive impulse to conceal a 
secret assignation, a blend of modesty and ostentation, the need to confess what 
one finds so delightful and to shew that one is loved, a divination of what the 
other person knows or guesses — but does not say — a divination which, 
exceeding or falling short of the other person’s, makes one now exaggerate, now 
under-estimate it, the spontaneous longing to play with fire and the 
determination to rescue something from the blaze. At the same time, speaking 
generally, let us say that M. de Charlus, notwithstanding the aggravation of his 
malady which perpetually urged him to reveal, to insinuate, sometimes boldly to 
invent compromising details, did intend, during this period in his life, to make it 
known that Charlie was not a man of the same sort as himself and that they were 
friends and nothing more. This did not prevent him (even though it may quite 
possibly have been true) from contradicting himself at times (as with regard to 
the hour at which they had last met), whether he forgot himself at such moments 
and told the truth, or invented a lie, boastingly or from a sentimental affectation 
or because he thought it amusing to baffle his questioner. “You know that he is to 
me,” the Baron went on, “the best of comrades, for whom I have the greatest 
affection, as I am certain” (was he uncertain of it, then, that he felt the need to 
say that he was certain?) “he has for me, but there is nothing at all between us, 
nothing of that sort, you understand, nothing of that sort,” said the Baron, as 
naturally as though he had been speaking of a woman. “Yes, he came in this 
morning to pull me out of bed. Though he knows that I hate anybody to see me 
in bed. You don’t mind? Oh, it’s horrible, it’s so disturbing, one looks so 
perfectly hideous, of course I’m no longer five-and-twenty, they won’t choose 
me to be Queen of the May, still one does like to feel that one is looking one’s 
best.” 

It is possible that the Baron was in earnest when he spoke of Morel as a 
good comrade, and that he was being even more truthful than he supposed when 
he said: “I never know what he’s doing; he tells me nothing about his life.” 

Indeed we may mention (interrupting for a few moments our narrative, 
which shall be resumed immediately after the closure of this parenthesis which 
opens at the moment when M. de Charlus, Brichot and myself are arriving at 
Mme. Verdurin’s front door), we may mention that shortly before this evening 
the Baron had been plunged in grief and stupefaction by a letter which he had 
opened by mistake and which was addressed to Morel. This letter, which by a 



repercussion was to cause intense misery to myself also, was written by the 
actress Lea, notorious for her exclusive interest in women. And yet her letter to 
Morel (whom M. de Charlus had never suspected of knowing her, even) was 
written in the most impassioned tone. Its indelicacy prevents us from 
reproducing it here, but we may mention that Lea addressed him throughout in 
the feminine gender, with such expressions as: “Go on, you bad woman!” or “Of 
course you are so, my pretty, you know you are.” And in this letter reference was 
made to various other women who seemed to be no less Morel’s friends than 
Lea’s. On the other hand, Morel’s sarcasm at the Baron’s expense and Lea’s at 
that of an officer who was keeping her, and of whom she said: “He keeps writing 
me letters begging me to be careful! What do you say to that, my little white 
puss,” revealed to M. de Charlus a state of things no less unsuspected by him 
than were Morel’s peculiar and intimate relations with Lea. What most disturbed 
the Baron was the word 'so.’ Ignorant at first of its application, he had 
eventually, at a time already remote in the past, learned that he himself was 'so.’ 
And now the notion that he had acquired of this word was again put to the 
challenge. When he had discovered that he was 'so,’ he had supposed this to 
mean that his tastes, as Saint-Simon says, did not lie in the direction of women. 
And here was this word ‘so’ applied to Morel with an extension of meaning of 
which M. de Charlus was unaware, so much so that Morel gave proof, according 
to this letter, of his being ‘so’ by having the same taste as certain women for 
other women. From that moment the Baron’s jealousy had no longer any reason 
to confine itself to the men of Morel’s acquaintance, but began to extend to the 
women also. So that the people who were ‘so’ were not merely those that he had 
supposed to be ‘so,’ but a whole and vast section of the inhabitants of the planet, 
consisting of women as well as of men, loving not merely men but women also, 
and the Baron, in the face of this novel meaning of a word that was so familiar to 
him, felt himself tormented by an anxiety of the mind as well as of the heart, 
born of this twofold mystery which combined an extension of the field of his 
jealousy with the sudden inadequacy of a definition. 

M. de Charlus had never in his life been anything but an amateur. That is to 
say, incidents of this sort could never be of any use to him. He worked off the 
painful impression that they might make upon him in violent scenes in which he 
was a past-master of eloquence, or in crafty intrigues. But to a person endowed 
with the qualities of a Bergotte, for instance, they might have been of 
inestimable value. This may indeed explain, to a certain extent (since we have to 
grope blindfold, but choose, like the lower animals, the herb that is good for us), 



why men like Bergotte have generally lived in the company of persons who were 
ordinary, false and malicious. Their beauty is sufficient for the writer’s 
imagination, enhances his generosity, but does not in any way alter the nature of 
his companion, whose life, situated thousands of feet below the level of his own, 
her incredible stories, her lies carried farther, and, what is more, in another 
direction than what might have been expected, appear in occasional flashes. The 
lie, the perfect lie, about people whom we know, about the relations that we have 
had with them, about our motive for some action, a motive which we express in 
totally different terms, the lie as to what we are, whom we love, what we feel 
with regard to the person who loves us and believes that she has fashioned us in 
her own image because she keeps on kissing us morning, noon and night, that lie 
is one of the only things in the world that can open a window for us upon what is 
novel, unknown, that can awaken in us sleeping senses to the contemplation of 
universes that otherwise we should never have known. We are bound to say, in 
so far as M. de Charlus is concerned, that, if he was stupefied to learn with 
regard to Morel a certain number of things which the latter had carefully 
concealed from him, he was not justified in concluding from this that it was a 
mistake to associate too closely with the lower orders. We shall indeed see, in 
the concluding section of this work, M. de Charlus himself engaged in doing 
things which would have stupefied the members of his family and his friends far 
more than he could possibly have been stupefied by the revelations of Lea. (The 
revelation that he had found most painful had been that of a tour which Morel 
had made with Lea, whereas at the time he had assured M. de Charlus that he 
was studying music in Germany. He had found support for this falsehood in 
obliging friends in Germany to whom he had sent his letters, to be forwarded 
from there to M. de Charlus, who, as it happened, was so positive that Morel was 
there that he had not even looked at the postmark.) But it is time to rejoin the 
Baron as he advances with Brichot and myself towards the Verdurins’ door. 

“And what,” he went on, turning to myself, “has become of your young 
Hebrew friend, whom we met at Douville? It occurred to me that, if you liked, 
one might perhaps invite him to the house one evening.” For M. de Charlus, who 
did not shrink from employing a private detective to spy upon every word and 
action of Morel, for all the world like a husband or a lover, had not ceased to pay 
attention to other young men. The vigilance which he made one of his old 
servants maintain, through an agency, upon Morel, was so indiscreet that his 
footmen thought they were being watched, and one of the housemaids could not 
endure the suspense, never ventured into the street, always expecting to find a 



policeman at her heels. “She can do whatever she likes! It would be a waste of 
time and money to follow her! As if her goings on mattered to us!” the old 
servant ironically exclaimed, for he was so passionately devoted to his master 
that, albeit he in no way shared the Baron’s tastes, he had come in time, with 
such ardour did he employ himself in their service, to speak of them as though 
they were his own. “He is the very best of good fellows,” M. de Charlus would 
say of this old servant, for we never appreciate anyone so much as those who 
combine with other great virtues that of placing themselves unconditionally at 
the disposal of our vices. It was moreover of men alone that M. de Charlus was 
capable of feeling any jealousy so far as Morel was concerned. Women inspired 
in him no jealousy whatever. This is indeed an almost universal rule with the 
Charlus type. The love of the man with whom they are in love for women is 
something different, which occurs in another animal species (a lion does not 
interfere with tigers); does not distress them; if anything, reassures them. 
Sometimes, it is true, in the case of those who exalt their inversion to the level of 
a priesthood, this love creates disgust. These men resent their friends’ having 
succumbed to it, not as a betrayal but as a lapse from virtue. A Charlus, of a 
different variety from the Baron, would have been as indignant at the discovery 
of Morel’s relations with a woman as upon reading in a newspaper that he, the 
interpreter of Bach and Handel, was going to play Puccini. It is, by the way, for 
this reason that the young men who, with an eye to their own personal 
advantage, condescend to the love of men like Charlus, assure them that women 
inspire them only with disgust, just as they would tell a doctor that they never 
touch alcohol, and care only for spring water. But M. de Charlus, in this respect, 
departed to some extent from the general rule. Since he admired everything 
about Morel, the latter’s successes with women caused him no annoyance, gave 
him the same joy as his successes on the platform, or at ecarte. “But do you 
know, my dear fellow, he has women,” he would say, with an air of disclosure, 
of scandal, possibly of envy, above all of admiration. “He is extraordinary,” he 
would continue. “Everywhere, the most famous whores can look at nobody but 
him. They stare at him everywhere, whether, it’s on the underground or in the 
theatre. It’s becoming a nuisance! I can’t go out with him to a restaurant without 
the waiter bringing him notes from at least three women. And always pretty 
women too. Not that there’s anything surprising in that. I was watching him 
yesterday, I can quite understand it, he has become so beautiful, he looks just 
like a Bronzino, he is really marvellous.” But M. de Charlus liked to shew that 
he was in love with Morel, to persuade other people, possibly to persuade 



himself, that Morel was in love with him. He applied to the purpose of having 
Morel always with him (notwithstanding the harm that the young fellow might 
do to the Baron’s social position) a sort of self-esteem. For (and this is frequent 
among men of good position, who are snobs, and, in their vanity, sever all their 
social ties in order to be seen everywhere with a mistress, a person of doubtful or 
a lady of tarnished reputation, whom nobody will invite, and with whom 
nevertheless it seems to them flattering to be associated) he had arrived at that 
stage at which self-esteem devotes all its energy to destroying the goals to which 
it has attained, whether because, under the influence of love, a man finds a 
prestige which he is alone in perceiving in ostentatious relations with the 
beloved object, or because, by the waning of social ambitions that have been 
gratified, and the rising of a tide of subsidiary curiosities all the more absorbing 
the more platonic they are, the latter have not only reached but have passed the 
level at which the former found it difficult to remain. 

As for young men in general, M. de Charlus found that to his fondness for 
them Morel’s existence was not an obstacle, and that indeed his brilliant 
reputation as a violinist or his growing fame as a composer and journalist might 
in certain instances prove an attraction. Did anyone introduce to the Baron a 
young composer of an agreeable type, it was in Morel’s talents that he sought an 
opportunity of doing the stranger a favour. “You must,” he would tell him, “bring 
me some of your work so that Morel can play it at a concert or on tour. There is 
hardly any decent music written, now, for the violin. It is a godsend to find 
anything new. And abroad they appreciate that sort of thing enormously. Even in 
the provinces there are little musical societies where they love music with a 
fervour and intelligence that are quite admirable.” Without any greater sincerity 
(for all this could serve only as a bait and it was seldom that Morel 
condescended to fulfil these promises), Bloch having confessed that he was 
something of a poet (when he was 'in the mood,’ he had added with the sarcastic 
laugh with which he would accompany a platitude, when he could think of 
nothing original), M. de Charlus said to me: “You must tell your young Israelite, 
since he writes verses, that he must really bring me some for Morel. For a 
composer, that is always the stumbling block, to find something decent to set to 
music. One might even consider a libretto. It would not be without interest, and 
would acquire a certain value from the distinction of the poet, from my 
patronage, from a whole chain of auxiliary circumstances, among which Morel’s 
talent would take the chief place, for he is composing a lot just now, and writing 
too, and very pleasantly, I must talk to you about it. As for his talent as a 



performer (there, as you know, he is already a past-master), you shall see this 
evening how well the lad plays Vinteuirs music; he overwhelms me; at his age, 
to have such an understanding while he is still such a boy, such a kid! Oh, this 
evening is only to be a little rehearsal. The big affair is to come off in two or 
three days. But it will be much more distinguished this evening. And so we are 
delighted that you have come,” he went on, employing the plural pronoun 
doubtless because a King says: “It is our wish.” “The programme is so 
magnificent that I have advised Mme. Verdurin to give two parties. One in a few 
days’ time, at which she will have all her own friends, the other to-night at which 
the hostess is, to use a legal expression, 'disseized.’ It is I who have issued the 
invitations, and I have collected a few people from another sphere, who may be 
useful to Charlie, and whom it will be nice for the Verdurins to meet. Don’t you 
agree, it is all very well to have the finest music played by the greatest artists, the 
effect of the performance remains muffled in cotton-wool, if the audience is 
composed of the milliner from across the way and the grocer from round the 
corner. You know what I think of the intellectual level of people in society, still 
they can play certain quite important parts, among others that which in public 
events devolves upon the press, and which is that of being an organ of publicity. 
You know what I mean; I have for instance invited my sister-in-law Oriane; it is 
not certain that she will come, but it is on the other hand certain that, if she does 
come, she will understand absolutely nothing. But one does not ask her to 
understand, which is beyond her capacity, but to talk, a task which is admirably 
suited to her, and which she never fails to perform. What is the result? To¬ 
morrow as ever is, instead of the silence of the milliner and the grocer, an 
animated conversation at the Mortemarts’ with Oriane telling everyone that she 
has heard the most marvellous music, that a certain Morel, and so forth; 
unspeakable rage of the people not invited, who will say: 'Palamede thought, no 
doubt, that we were unworthy; anyhow, who are these people who were giving 
the party?’ a counterblast quite as useful as Oriane’s praises, because Morel’s 
name keeps cropping up all the time and is finally engraved in the memory like a 
lesson that one has read over a dozen times. All this forms a chain of 
circumstances which may be of value to the artist, to the hostess, may serve as a 
sort of megaphone for a performance which will thus be made audible to a 
remote public. Really, it is worth the trouble; you shall see what progress Charlie 
has made. And what is more, we have discovered a new talent in him, my dear 
fellow, he writes like an angel. Like an angel, I tell you.” M. de Charlus omitted 
to say that for some time past he had been employing Morel, like those great 



noblemen of the seventeenth century who scorned to sign and even to write their 
own slanderous attacks, to compose certain vilely calumnious little paragraphs at 
the expense of Comtesse Mole. Their insolence apparent even to those who 
merely glanced at them, how much more cruel were they to the young woman 
herself, who found in them, so skilfully introduced that nobody but herself saw 
the point, certain passages from her own correspondence, textually quoted, but 
interpreted in a sense which made them as deadly as the cruellest revenge. They 
killed the lady. But there is edited every day in Paris, Balzac would tell us, a sort 
of spoken newspaper, more terrible than its printed rivals. We shall see later on 
that this verbal press reduced to nothing the power of a Charlus who had fallen 
out of fashion, and exalted far above him a Morel who was not worth the 
millionth part of his former patron. Is this intellectual fashion really so simple, 
and does it sincerely believe in the nullity of a Charlus of genius, in the 
incontestable authority of a crass Morel? The Baron was not so innocent in his 
implacable vengeance. Whence, no doubt, that bitter venom on his tongue, the 
spreading of which seemed to dye his cheeks with jaundice when he was in a 
rage. “You who knew Bergotte,” M. de Charlus went on, “I thought at one time 
that you might, perhaps, by refreshing his memory with regard to the youngster’s 
writings, collaborate in short with myself, help me to assist a twofold talent, that 
of a musician and a writer, which may one day acquire the prestige of that of 
Berlioz. As you know, the Illustrious have often other things to think about, they 
are smothered in flattery, they take little interest except in themselves. But 
Bergotte, who was genuinely unpretentious and obliging, promised me that he 
would get into the Gaulois, or some such paper, those little articles, a blend of 
the humourist and the musician, which he really does quite charmingly now, and 
I am really very glad that Charlie should combine with his violin this little stroke 
of Ingres’s pen. I know that I am prone to exaggeration, when he is concerned, 
like all the old fairy godmothers of the Conservatoire. What, my dear fellow, 
didn’t you know that? You have never observed my little weakness. I pace up 
and down for hours on end outside the examination hall. I’m as happy as a 
queen. As for Charlie’s prose, Bergotte assured me that it was really very good 
indeed.” 

M. de Charlus, who had long been acquainted with Bergotte through Swann, 
had indeed gone to see him a few days before his death, to ask him to find an 
opening for Morel in some newspaper for a sort of commentary, half humorous, 
upon the music of the day. In doing so, M. de Charlus had felt some remorse, for, 
himself a great admirer of Bergotte, he was conscious that he never went to see 



him for his own sake, but in order, thanks to the respect, partly intellectual, 
partly social, that Bergotte felt for him, to be able to do a great service to Morel, 
or to some other of his friends. That he no longer made use of people in society 
for any other purpose did not shock M. de Charlus, but to treat Bergotte thus had 
appeared to him more offensive, for he felt that Bergotte had not the calculating 
nature of people in society, and deserved better treatment. Only, his was a busy 
life, and he could never find time for anything except when he was greatly 
interested in something, when, for instance, it affected Morel. What was more, as 
he was himself extremely intelligent, the conversation of an intelligent man left 
him comparatively cold, especially that of Bergotte who was too much the man 
of letters for his liking and belonged to another clan, did not share his point of 
view. As for Bergotte, he had observed the calculated motive of M. de Charlus’s 
visits, but had felt no resentment, for he had been incapable, throughout his life, 
of any consecutive generosity, but anxious to give pleasure, broadminded, 
insensitive to the pleasure of administering a rebuke. As for M. de Charlus’s 
vice, he had never partaken of it to the smallest extent, but had found in it rather 
an element of colour in the person affected, fas et nefas, for an artist, consisting 
not in moral examples but in memories of Plato or of Sodom. “But you, fair 
youth, we never see you at Quai Conti. You don’t abuse their hospitality!” I 
explained that I went out as a rule with my cousin. “Do you hear that! He goes 
out with his cousin! What a most particularly pure young man!” said M. de 
Charlus to Brichot. Then, turning again to myself: “But we are not asking you to 
give an account of your life, my boy. You are free to do anything that amuses 
you. We merely regret that we have no share in it. Besides, you shew very good 
taste, your cousin is charming, ask Brichot, she quite turned his head at Douville. 
We shall regret her absence this evening. But you did just as well, perhaps, not to 
bring her with you. Vinteuil’s music is delightful. But I have heard that we are to 
meet the composer’s daughter and her friend, who have a terrible reputation. 
That sort of thing is always awkward for a girl. They are sure to be there, unless 
the ladies have been detained in the country, for they were to have been present 
without fail all afternoon at a rehearsal which Mme. Verdurin was giving to-day, 
to which she had invited only the bores, her family, the people whom she could 
not very well have this evening. But a moment ago, before dinner, Charlie told 
us that the sisters Vinteuil. as we call them, for whom they were all waiting, 
never came.” Notwithstanding the intense pain that I had felt at the sudden 
association with its effect, of which alone I had been aware, of the cause, at 
length discovered, of Albertine’s anxiety to be there that afternoon, the presence 



publicly announced (but of which I had been ignorant) of Mile. Vinteuil and her 
friend, my mind was still sufficiently detached to remark that M. de Charlus, 
who had told us, a few minutes earlier, that he had not seen Charlie since the 
morning, was now brazenly admitting that he had seen him before dinner. My 
pain became visible. “Why, what is the matter with you?” said the Baron. “You 
are quite green; come, let us go in, you will catch cold, you don’t look at ah 
well.” It was not any doubt as to Albertine’s virtue that M. de Charlus’s words 
had awakened in me. Many other doubts had penetrated my mind already; at 
each fresh doubt we feel that the measure is heaped full, that we cannot cope 
with it, then we manage to find room for it ah the same, and once it is introduced 
into our vital essence it enters into competition there with so many longings to 
believe, so many reasons to forget, that we speedily become accustomed to it, 
and end by ceasing to pay it any attention. There remains only, like a partly 
healed pain, the menace of possible suffering, which, the counterpart of desire, a 
feeling of the same order, and like it become the centre of our thoughts, radiates 
through them to an infinite circumference a wistful melancholy, as desire 
radiates pleasures whose origin we fail to perceive, wherever anything may 
suggest the idea of the person with whom we are in love. But pain revives as 
soon as a fresh doubt enters our mind complete; even if we assure ourself almost 
immediately: “I shall deal with this, there must be some method by which I need 
not suffer, it cannot be true,” nevertheless there has been a first moment in which 
we suffered as though we believed it. If we had merely members, such as legs 
and arms, life would be endurable; unfortunately we carry inside us that little 
organ which we call the heart, which is subject to certain maladies in the course 
of which it is infinitely impressionable by everything that concerns the life of a 
certain person, so that a lie — that most harmless of things, in the midst of which 
we live so unconcernedly, if the lie be told by ourselves or by strangers — 
coming from that person, causes the little heart, which surgeons ought really to 
be able to excise from us, intolerable anguish. Let us not speak of the brain, for 
our mind may go on reasoning interminably in the course of this ansuish, it does 
no more to mitigate it than by taking thought can we soothe an aching tooth. It is 
true that this person is to blame for having lied to us, for she had sworn to us that 
she would always tell us the truth. But we know from our own shortcomings, 
towards other people, how little an oath is worth. And we have deliberately 
believed them when they came from her, the very person to whose interest it has 
always been to he to us, and whom, moreover, we did not select for her virtues. 
It is true that, later on, she would almost cease to have any need to he to us — at 



the moment when our heart will have grown indifferent to her falsehood — 
because then we shall not feel any interest in her life. We know this, and, 
notwithstanding, we deliberately sacrifice our own lives, either by killing 
ourselves for her sake, or by letting ourselves be sentenced to death for having 
murdered her, or simply by spending, in the course of a few evenings, our whole 
fortune upon her, which will oblige us presently to commit suicide because we 
have not a penny in the world. Besides, however calm we may imagine 
ourselves when we are in love, we always have love in our heart in a state of 
unstable equilibrium. A trifle is sufficient to exalt it to the position of happiness, 
we radiate happiness, we smother in our affection not her whom we love, but 
those who have given us merit in her eyes, who have protected her from every 
evil temptation; we think that our mind is at ease, and a word is sufficient: 
‘Gilberte is not coming,’ ‘Mademoiselle Vinteuil is expected,’ to make all the 
preconceived happiness towards which we were rising collapse, to make the sun 
hide his face, to open the bag of the winds and let loose the internal tempest 
which one day we shall be incapable of resisting. That day, the day upon which 
the heart has become so frail, our friends who respect us are pained that such 
trifles, that certain persons, can so affect us, can bring us to death’s door. But 
what are they to do? If a poet is dying of septic pneumonia, can one imagine his 
friends explaining to the pneumococcus that the poet is a man of talent and that 
it ought to let him recover? My doubt, in so far as it referred to Mile. Vinteuil, 
was not entirely novel. But to a certain extent, my jealousy of the afternoon, 
inspired by Lea and her friends, had abolished it. Once that peril of the 
Trocadero was removed, I had felt that I had recaptured for all time complete 
peace of mind. But what was entirely novel to me was a certain excursion as to 
which Andree had told me: “We went to this place and that, we didn’t meet 
anyone,” and during which, on the contrary, Mile. Vinteuil had evidently 
arranged to meet Albertine at Mme. Verdurin’s. At this moment I would gladly 
have allowed Albertine to go out by herself, to go wherever she might choose, 
provided that I might lock up Mile. Vinteuil and her friend somewhere and be 
certain that Albertine would not meet them. The fact is that jealousy is, as a rule, 
partial, of intermittent application, whether because it is the painful extension of 
an anxiety which is provoked now by one person, now by another with whom 
our mistress may be in love, or because of the exiguity of our thought which is 
able to realise only what it can represent to itself and leaves everything else in an 
obscurity which can cause us only a proportionately modified anguish. 

Just as we were about to ring the bell we were overtaken by Saniette who 



informed us that Princess Sherbatoff had died at six o’clock, and added that he 
had not at first recognised us. “I envisaged you, however, for some time,” he told 
us in a breathless voice. “Is it aught but curious that I should have hesitated?” To 
say “Is it not curious” would have seemed to him wrong, and he had acquired a 
familiarity with obsolete forms of speech that was becoming exasperating. “Not 
but what you are people whom one may acknowledge as friends.” His grey 
complexion seemed to be illuminated by the livid glow of a storm. His 
breathlessness, which had been noticeable, as recently as last summer, only when 
M. Verdurin ‘jumped down his throat,’ was now continuous. “I understand that 
an unknown work of Vinteuil is to be performed by excellent artists, and 
singularly by Morel.” “Why singularly?” inquired the Baron who detected a 
criticism in the adverb. “Our friend Saniette,” Brichot made haste to exclaim, 
acting as interpreter, “is prone to speak, like the excellent scholar that he is, the 
language of an age in which ‘singularly’ was equivalent to our ‘especially.’” 

As we entered the Verdurins’ hall, M. de Charlus asked me whether I was 
engaged upon any work and as I told him that I was not, but that I was greatly 
interested at the moment in old dinner-services of plate and porcelain, he assured 
me that I could not see any finer than those that the Verdurins had; that moreover 
I might have seen them at la Raspeliere, since, on the pretext that one’s 
possessions are also one’s friends, they were so silly as to cart everything down 
there with them; it would be less convenient to bring everything out for my 
benefit on the evening of a party; still, he would tell them to shew me anything 
that I wished to see. I begged him not to do anything of the sort. M. de Charlus 
unbuttoned his greatcoat, took off his hat, and I saw that the top of his head had 
now turned silver in patches. But like a precious shrub which is not only 
coloured with autumn tints but certain leaves of which are protected by bandages 
of wadding or incrustations of plaster, M. de Charlus received from these few 
white hairs at his crest only a further variegation added to those of his face. And 
yet, even beneath the layers of different expressions, paint and hypocrisy which 
formed such a bad ‘make-up,’ his face continued to hide from almost everyone 
the secret that it seemed to me to be crying aloud. I was almost put to shame by 
his eyes in which I was afraid of his surprising me in the act of reading it, as 
from an open book, by his voice which seemed to me to be repeating it in every 
tone, with an untiring indecency. But secrets are well kept by such people, for 
everyone who comes in contact with them is deaf and blind. The people who 
learned the truth from some one else, from the Verdurins for instance, believed 
it, but only for so long as they had not met M. de Charlus. His face, so far from 



spreading, dissipated every scandalous rumour. For we form so extravagant an 
idea of certain characters that we would be incapable of identifying one of them 
with the familiar features of a person of our acquaintance. And we find it 
difficult to believe in such a person’s vices, just as we can never believe in the 
genius of a person with whom we went to the Opera last night. 

M. de Charlus was engaged in handing over his greatcoat with the 
instructions of a familiar guest. But the footman to whom he was handing it was 
a newcomer, and quite young. Now M. de Charlus had by this time begun, as 
people say, to ‘lose his bearings’ and did not always remember what might and 
what might not be done. The praiseworthy desire that he had felt at Balbec to 
shew that certain topics did not alarm him, that he was not afraid to declare with 
regard to some one or other: “He is a nice-looking boy,” to utter, in short, the 
same words as might have been uttered by somebody who was not like himself, 
this desire he had now begun to express by saying on the contrary things which 
nobody could ever have said who was not like him, things upon which his mind 
was so constantly fixed that he forgot that they do not form part of the habitual 
preoccupation of people in general. And so, as he gazed at the new footman, he 
raised his forefinger in the air in a menacing fashion and, thinking that he was 
making an excellent joke: “You are not to make eyes at me like that, do you 
hear?” said the Baron, and, turning to Brichot: “He has a quaint little face, that 
boy, his nose is rather fun,” and, completing his joke, or yielding to a desire, he 
lowered his forefinger horizontally, hesitated for an instant, then, unable to 
control himself any longer, thrust it irresistibly forwards at the footman and 
touched the tip of his nose, saying “Pif!” “That’s a rum card,” the footman said 
to himself, and inquired of his companions whether it was a joke or what it was. 
“It is just a way he has,” said the butler (who regarded the Baron as slightly 
‘touched,’ ‘a bit balmy’), “but he is one of Madame’s friends for whom I have 
always had the greatest respect, he has a good heart.” 

“Are you coming back this year to Incarville?” Brichot asked me. “I believe 
that our hostess has taken la Raspeliere again, for all that she has had a crow to 
pick with her landlords. But that is nothing, it is a cloud that passes,” he added in 
the optimistic tone of the newspapers that say: “Mistakes have been made, it is 
true, but who does not make mistakes at times?” But I remembered the state of 
anguish in which I had left Balbec, and felt no desire to return there. I kept 
putting off to the morrow my plans for Albertine. “Why, of course he is coming 
back, we need him, he is indispensable to us,” declared M. de Charlus with the 
authoritative and uncomprehending egoism of friendliness. 



At this moment M. Verdurin appeared to welcome us. When we expressed 
our sympathy over Princess Sherbatoff, he said: “Yes, I believe she is rather ill.” 
“No, no, she died at six o’clock,” exclaimed Saniette. “Oh, you exaggerate 
everything,” was M. Verdurin’s brutal retort, for, since he had not cancelled his 
party, he preferred the hypothesis of illness, imitating unconsciously the Due de 
Guermantes. Saniette, not without fear of catching cold, for the outer door was 
continually being opened, stood waiting resignedly for some one to take his hat 
and coat. “What are you hanging about there for, like a whipped dog?” M. 
Verdurin asked him. “I am waiting until one of the persons who are charged with 
the cloakroom can take my coat and give me a number.” “What is that you say?” 
demanded M. Verdurin with a stern expression. “'Charged with the cloakroom?’ 
Are you going off your head? 'In charge of the cloakroom,’ is what we say, if 
we’ve got to teach you to speak your own language, like a man who has had a 
stroke.” “Charged with a thing is the correct form,” murmured Saniette in a 
stifled tone; “the abbe Le Batteux...” “You make me tired, you do,” cried M. 
Verdurin in a voice of thunder. “How you do wheezel Have you been running 
upstairs to an attic?” The effect of M. Verdurin’s rudeness was that the servants 
in the cloakroom allowed other guests to take precedence of Saniette and, when 
he tried to hand over his things, replied: “Wait for your turn, Sir, don’t be in such 
a hurry.” “There’s system for you, competent fellows, that’s right, my lads,” said 
M. Verdurin with an approving smile, in order to encourage them in their 
tendency to keep Saniette waiting till the end. “Come along,” he said to us, “the 
creature wants us all to catch our death hanging about in his beloved draught. 
Come and get warm in the drawing-room. ‘Charged with the cloakroom,’ indeed, 
what an idiot!” “He is inclined to be a little precious, but he’s not a bad fellow,” 
said Brichot. “I never said that he was a bad fellow, I said that he was an idiot,” 
was M. Verdurin’s harsh retort. 

Meanwhile Mme. Verdurin was busily engaged with Cottard and Ski. Morel 
had just declined (because M. de Charlus could not be present) an invitation 
from some friends of hers to whom she had promised the services of the 
violinist. The reason for Morel’s refusal to perform at the party which the 
Verdurins’ friends were giving, a reason which we shall presently see reinforced 
by others of a far more serious kind, might have found its justification in a habit 
common to the leisured classes in general but specially distinctive of the little 
nucleus. To be sure, if Mme. Verdurin intercepted between a newcomer and one 
of the faithful a whispered speech which might let it be supposed that they were 
already acquainted, or wished to become more intimate (“On Friday, then, at So- 



and-So’s,” or “Come to the studio any day you like; I am always there until five 
o’clock, I shall look forward to seeing you”), agitated, supposing the newcomer 
to occupy a 'position 5 which would make him a brilliant recruit to the little clan, 
the Mistress, while pretending not to have heard anything, and preserving in her 
fine eyes, shadowed by the habit of listening to Debussy more than they would 
have been by that of sniffing cocaine, the extenuated expression that they 
derived from musical intoxication alone, revolved nevertheless behind her 
splendid brow, inflated by all those quartets and the headaches that were their 
consequence, thoughts which were not exclusively polyphonic, and unable to 
contain herself any longer, unable to postpone the injection for another instant, 
flung herself upon the speakers, drew them apart, and said to the newcomer, 
pointing to the 'faithful 5 one: “You wouldn’t care to come and dine to meet him, 
next Saturday, shall we say, or any day you like, with some really nice people! 
Don’t speak too loud, as I don’t want to invite all this mob” (a word used to 
denote for five minutes the little nucleus, disdained for the moment in favour of 
the newcomer in whom so many hqpes were placed). 

But this infatuated impulse, this need to make friendly overtures, had its 
counterpart. Assiduous attendance at their Wednesdays aroused in the Verdurins 
an opposite tendency. This was the desire to quarrel, to hold aloof. It had been 
strengthened, had almost been wrought to a frenzy during the months spent at la 
Raspeliere, where they were all together morning, noon and night. M. Verdurin 
went out of his way to prove one of his guests in the wrong, to spin webs in 
which he might hand over to his comrade spider some innocent fly. Failing a 
grievance, he would invent some absurdity. As soon as one of the faithful had 
been out of the house for half an hour, they would make fun of him in front of 
the others, would feign surprise that their guests had not noticed how his teeth 
were never clean, or how on the contrary he had a mania for brushing them 
twenty times a day. If any one took the liberty of opening a window, this want of 
breeding would cause a glance of disgust to pass between host and hostess. A 
moment later Mme. Verdurin would ask for a shawl, which gave M. Verdurin an 
excuse for saying in a tone of fury: “No, I shall close the window, I wonder who 
had the impertinence to open it,” in the hearing of the guilty wretch who blushed 
to the roots of his hair. You were rebuked indirectly for the quantity of wine that 
you had drunk. “It won’t do you any harm. Navvies thrive on it!” If two of the 
faithful went out together without first obtaining permission from the Mistress, 
their excursions led to endless comments, however innocent they might be. 
Those of M. de Charlus with Morel were not innocent. It was only the fact that 



M. de Charlus was not staying at la Raspeliere (because Morel was obliged to 
live near his barracks) that retarded the hour of satiety, disgust, retching. That 
hour was, however, about to strike. 

Mme. Verdurin was furious and determined to ‘enlighten’ Morel as to the 
ridiculous and detestable part that M. de Charlus was making him play. “I must 
add,” she went on (Mme. Verdurin, when she felt that she owed anyone a debt of 
gratitude which would be a burden to him, and was unable to rid herself of it by 
killing him, would discover a serious defect in him which would honourably 
dispense her from shewing her gratitude), “I must add that he gives himself airs 
in my house which I do not at all like.” The truth was that Mme. Verdurin had 
another more serious reason than Morel’s refusal to play at her friends’ party for 
picking a quarrel with M. de Charlus. The latter, overcome by the honour he was 
doing the Mistress in bringing to Quai Conti people who after all would never 
have come there for her sake, had, on hearing the first names that Mme. Verdurin 
had suggested as those of people who ought to be invited, pronounced the most 
categorical ban upon them in a peremptory tone which blended the rancorous 
pride of a crotchety nobleman with the dogmatism of the expert artist in 
questions of entertainment who would cancel his programme and withhold his 
collaboration sooner than agree to concessions which, in his opinion, would 
endanger the success of the whole. M. de Charlus had given his approval, 
hedging it round with reservations, to Saintine alone, with whom, in order not to 
be bothered with his wife, Mme. de Guermantes had passed, from a daily 
intimacy, to a complete severance of relations, but whom M. de Charlus, finding 
him intelligent, continued to see. True, it was among a middle-class set, with a 
cross-breeding of the minor nobility, where people are merely very rich and 
connected with an aristocracy whom the true aristocracy does not know, that 
Saintine, at one time the flower of the Guermantes set, had gone to seek his 
fortune and, he imagined, a social foothold. But Mme. Verdurin, knowing the 
blue-blooded pretensions of the wife’s circle, and failing to take into account the 
husband’s position (for it is what is immediately over our head that gives us the 
impression of altitude and not what is almost invisible to us, so far is it lost in the 
clouds), felt that she ought to justify an invitation of Saintine by pointing out that 

he knew a great many people, “having married Mile. -.” The ignorance 

which this assertion, the direct opposite of the truth, revealed in Mme. Verdurin 
caused the Baron’s painted lips to part in a smile of indulgent scorn and wide 
comprehension. He disdained a direct answer, but as he was always ready to 
express in social examples theories which shewed the fertility of his mind and 



the arrogance of his pride, with the inherited frivolity of his occupations: 
“Saintine ought to have come to me before marrying,” he said, “there is such a 
thing as social as well as physiological eugenics, and I am perhaps the only 
specialist in existence. Saintine’s case aroused no discussion, it was clear that, in 
making the marriage that he made, he was tying a stone to his neck, and hiding 
his light under a bushel. His social career was at an end. I should have explained 
this to him, and he would have understood me, for he is quite intelligent. On the 
other hand, there was a person who had everything that he required to make his 
position exalted, predominant, world-wide, only a terrible cable bound him to 
the earth. I helped him, partly by pressure, partly by force, to break his bonds 
and now he has won, with a triumphant joy, the freedom, the omnipotence that 
he owes to me; it required, perhaps, a little determination on his part, but what a 
reward! Thus a man can himself, when he has the sense to listen to me, become 
the midwife of his destiny.” It was only too clear that M. de Charlus had not 
been able to influence his own; action is a different thing from speech, even 
eloquent speech, and from thought, even the thoughts of genius. “But, so far as I 
am concerned, I live the life of a philosopher who looks on with interest at the 
social reactions which I have foretold, but who does not assist them. And so I 
have continued to visit Saintine, who has always received me with the whole¬ 
hearted deference which is my due. I have even dined with him in his new 
abode, where one is heavily bored, in the midst of the most sumptuous 
splendour, as one used to be amused in the old days when, living from hand to 
mouth, he used to assemble the best society in a wretched attic. Him, then, you 
may invite, I give you leave, but I rule out with my veto all the other names that 
you have mentioned. And you will thank me for it, for, if I am an expert in 
arranging marriages, I am no less an expert in arranging parties. I know the 
rising people who give tone to a gathering, make it go; and I know also the 
names that will bring it down to the ground, make it fall flat.” These exclusions 
were not always founded upon the Baron’s personal resentments nor upon his 
artistic refinements, but upon his skill as an actor. When he had perfected, at the 
expense of somebody or something, an entirely successful epigram, he was 
anxious to let it be heard by the largest possible audience, but took care not to 
admit to the second performance the audience of the first who could have borne 
witness that the novelty was not novel. He would then rearrange his drawing¬ 
room, simply because he did not alter his programme, and, when he had scored a 
success in conversation, would, if need be, have organised a tour, and given 
exhibitions in the provinces. Whatever may have been the various motives for 



these exclusions, they did not merely annoy Mme. Verdurin, who felt her 
authority as a hostess impaired, they also did her great damage socially, and for 
two reasons. The first was that M. de Charlus, even more susceptible than 
Jupien, used to quarrel, without anyone’s ever knowing why, with the people 
who were most suited to be his friends. Naturally, one of the first punishments 
that he could inflict upon them was that of not allowing them to be invited to a 
party which he was giving at the Verdurins’. Now these pariahs were often 
people who are in the habit of ruling the roost, as the saying is, but who in M. de 
Charlus’s eyes had ceased to rule it from the day on which he had quarrelled 
with them. For his imagination, in addition to finding people in the wrong in 
order to quarrel with them, was no less ingenious in stripping them of all 
importance as soon as they ceased to be his friends. If, for instance, the guilty 
person came of an extremely old family, whose dukedom, however, dates only 
from the nineteenth century, such a family as the Montesquieu, from that 
moment all that counted for M. de Charlus was the precedence of the dukedom, 
the family becoming nothing. “They are not even Dukes,” he would exclaim. “It 
is the title of the abbe de Montesquieu which passed most irregularly to a 
collateral, less than eighty years ago. The present Duke, if Duke he can be 
called, is the third. You may talk to me if you like of people like the Uzes, the La 
Tremoilie, the Luynes, who are tenth or fourteenth Dukes, or my brother who is 
twelfth Due de Guermantes and seventeenth Prince of Cordova. The 
Montesquieu are descended from an old family, what would that prove, 
supposing that it were proved? They have descended so far that they have 
reached the fourteenth storey below stairs.” Had he on the contrary quarrelled 
with a gentleman who possessed an ancient dukedom, who boasted the most 
magnificent connexions, was related to ruling princes, but to whose line this 
distinction had come quite suddenly without any length of pedigree, a Luynes 
for instance, the case was altered, pedigree alone counted. “I ask you — M. 
Alberti, who does not emerge from the mire until Louis XIII. What can it matter 
to us that favouritism at court allowed them to pick up dukedoms to which they 
have no right?” What was more, with M. de Charlus, the fall came immediately 
after the exaltation because of that tendency peculiar to the Guermantes to 
expect from conversation, from friendship, something that these are incapable of 
giving, as well as the symptomatic fear of becoming the objects of slander. And 
the fall was all the greater, the higher the exaltation had been. Now nobody had 
ever found such favour with the Baron as he had markedly shewn for Comtesse 
Mole. By what sign of indifference did she reveal, one fine day, that she had 



been unworthy of it? The Comtesse always maintained that she had never been 
able to solve the problem. The fact remains that the mere sound of her name 
aroused in the Baron the most violent rage, provoked the most eloquent but the 
most terrible philippics. Mme. Verdurin, to whom Mme. Mole had been very 
kind, and who was founding, as we shall see, great hopes upon her and had 
rejoiced in anticipation at the thought that the Comtesse would meet in her house 
all the noblest names, as the Mistress said, “of France and Navarre,” at once 
proposed to invite “Madame de Mole.” “Oh, my God! Everyone has his own 
taste,” M. de Charlus had replied, “and if you, Madame, feel a desire to converse 
with Mme. Pipelet, Mme. Gibout and Mme. Joseph Prudhomme, I ask nothing 
better, but let it be on an evening when I am not present. I could see as soon as 
you opened your mouth that we do not speak the same language, since I was 
mentioning the names of the nobility, and you retort with the most obscure 
names of professional and tradespeople, dirty scandalmongering little bounders, 
little women who imagine themselves patronesses of the arts because they 
repeat, an octave lower, the manners of my Guermantes sister-in-law, like a jay 
that thinks it is imitating a peacock. I must add that it would be positively 
indecent to admit to a party which I am pleased to give at Mme. Verdurin’s a 
person whom I have with good reason excluded from my society, a sheep devoid 
of birth, loyalty, intelligence, who is so idiotic as to suppose that she is capable 
of playing the Duchesse de Guermantes and the Princesse de Guermantes, a 
combination which is in itself idiotic, since the Duchesse de Guermantes and the 
Princesse de Guermantes are poles apart. It is as though a person should pretend 
to be at once Reichenberg and Sarah Bernhardt. In any case, even if it were not 
impossible, it would be extremely ridiculous. Even though I may, myself, smile 
at times at the exaggeration of one and regret the limitations of the other, that is 
my right. But that upstart little frog trying to blow herself out to the magnitude 
of two great ladies who, at all events, always reveal the incomparable distinction 
of blood, it is enough, as the saying is, to make a cat laugh. The Mole! That is a 
name which must not be uttered in my hearing, or else I must simply withdraw,” 
he concluded with a smile, in the tone of a doctor, who, thinking of his patient’s 
interests in spite of that same patient’s opposition, lets it be understood that he 
will not tolerate the collaboration of a homoeopath. On the other hand, certain 
persons whom M. de Charlus regarded as negligible might indeed be so for him 
but not for Mme. Verdurin. M. de Charlus, with his exalted birth, could afford to 
dispense with people in the height of fashion, the assemblage of whom would 
have made Mme. Verdurin’s drawing-room one of the first in Paris. She, at the 



same time, was beginning to feel that she had already on more than one occasion 
missed the coach, not to mention the enormous retardation that the social error of 
the Dreyfus case had inflicted upon her, not without doing her a service all the 
same. I forget whether I have mentioned the disapproval with which the 
Duchesse de Guermantes had observed certain persons of her world who, 
subordinating everything else to the Case, excluded fashionable women from 
their drawing-rooms and admitted others who were not fashionable, because 
they were for or against the fresh trial, and had then been criticised in her turn by 
those same ladies, as lukewarm, unsound in her views, and guilty of placing 
social distinctions above the national interests; may I appeal to the reader, as to a 
friend with regard to whom one completely forgets, at the end of a conversation, 
whether one has remembered, or had an opportunity to tell him something 
important? Whether I have done so or not, the attitude of the Duchesse de 
Guermantes can easily be imagined, and indeed if we look at it in the light of 
subsequent history may appear, from the social point of view, perfectly correct. 
M. de Cambremer regarded the Dreyfus case as a foreign machination intended 
to destroy the Intelligence Service, to undermine discipline, to weaken the army, 
to divide the French people, to pave the way for invasion. Literature being, apart 
from a few of La Fontaine’s fables, a sealed book to the Marquis, he left it to his 
wife to prove that the cruelly introspective writers of the day had, by creating a 
spirit of irreverence, arrived by a parallel course at a similar result. “M. Reinach 
and M. Hervieu are in the plot,” she would say. Nobody will accuse the Dreyfus 
case of having premeditated such dark designs upon society. But there it 
certainly has broken down the hedges. The social leaders who refuse to allow 
politics into society are as foreseeing as the soldiers who refuse to allow politics 
to permeate the army. Society is like the sexual appetite; one does not know at 
what forms of perversion it may not arrive, once we have allowed our choice to 
be dictated by aesthetic considerations. The reason that they were Nationalists 
gave the Faubourg Saint-Germain the habit of entertaining ladies from another 
class of society; the reason vanished with Nationalism, the habit remained. Mme. 
Verdurin, by the bond of Dreyfusism, had attracted to her house certain writers 
of distinction who for the moment were of no advantage to her socially, because 
they were Dreyfusards. But political passions are like all the rest, they do not 
last. Fresh generations arise which are incapable of understanding them. Even 
the generation that felt them changes, feels political passions which, not being 
modelled exactly upon their predecessors, make it rehabilitate some of the 
excluded, the reason for exclusion having altered. Monarchists no longer cared, 



at the time of the Dreyfus case, whether a man had been a Republican, that is to 
say a Radical, that is to say Anticlerical, provided that he was an anti-Semite and 
a Nationalist. Should a war ever come, patriotism would assume another form 
and if a writer was chauvinistic nobody would stop to think whether he had or 
had not been a Dreyfusard. It was thus that, at each political crisis, at each 
artistic revival, Mme. Verdurin had collected one by one, like a bird building its 
nest, the several items, useless for the moment, of what would one day be her 
Salon. The Dreyfus case had passed, Anatole France remained. Mme. Verdurin’s 
strength lay in her genuine love of art, the trouble that she used to take for her 
faithful, the marvellous dinners that she gave for them alone, without inviting 
anyone from the world of fashion. Each of the faithful was treated at her table as 
Bergotte had been treated at Mme. Swann’s. When a boon companion of this sort 
had turned into an illustrious man whom everybody was longing to meet, his 
presence at Mme. Verdurin’s had none of the artificial, composite effect of a dish 
at an official or farewell banquet, cooked by Potel or Chabot, but was merely a 
delicious 'ordinary’ which you would have found there in the same perfection on 
a day when there was no party at all. At Mme. Verdurin’s the cast was trained to 
perfection, the repertory most select, all that was lacking was an audience. And 
now that the public taste had begun to turn from the rational and French art of a 
Bergotte, and to go in, above all things, for exotic forms of music, Mme. 
Verdurin, a sort of official representative in Paris of all foreign artists, was not 
long in making her appearance, by the side of the exquisite Princess 
Yourbeletief, an aged Fairy Godmother, grim but all-powerful, to the Russian 
dancers. This charming invasion, against whose seductions only the stupidest of 
critics protested, infected Paris, as we know, with a fever of curiosity less 
burning, more purely aesthetic, but quite as intense perhaps as that aroused by 
the Dreyfus case. There again Mme. Verdurin, but with a very different result 
socially, was to take her place in the front row. Just as she had been seen by the 
side of Mme. Zola, immediately under the bench, during the trial in the Assize 
Court, so when the new generation of humanity, in their enthusiasm for the 
Russian ballet, thronged to the Opera, crowned with the latest novelty in 
aigrettes, they invariably saw in a stage box Mme. Verdurin by the side of 
Princess Yourbeletief. And just as, after the emotions of the law courts, people 
used to go in the evening to Mme. Verdurin’s, to meet Picquart or Labori in the 
flesh and what was more to hear the latest news of the Case, to learn what hopes 
might be placed in Zurlinden, Loubet, Colonel Jouaust, the Regulations, so now, 
little inclined for sleep after the enthusiasm aroused by the Scheherazade or 



Prince Igor, they repaired to Mme. Verdurin’s, where under the auspices of 
Princess Yourbeletief and their hostess an exquisite supper brought together 
every night the dancers themselves, who had abstained from dinner so as to be 
more resilient, their director, their designers, the great composers Igor Stravinski 
and Richard Strauss, a permanent little nucleus, around which, as round the 
supper-table of M. and Mme. Helvetius, the greatest ladies in Paris and foreign 
royalties were not too proud to gather. Even those people in society who 
professed to be endowed with taste and drew unnecessary distinctions between 
the various Russian ballets, regarding the setting of the Sylphides as somehow 
‘purer’ than that of Scheherazade, which they were almost prepared to attribute to 
Negro inspiration, were enchanted to meet face to face the great revivers of 
theatrical taste, who in an art that is perhaps a little more artificial than that of 
the easel had created a revolution as profound as Impressionism itself. 

To revert to M. de Charlus, Mme. Verdurin would not have minded so much 
if he had placed on his Index only Comtesse Mole and Mme. Bontemps, whom 
she had picked out at Odette’s on the strength of her love of the fine arts, and 
who during the Dreyfus case had come to dinner occasionally bringing her 
husband, whom Mme. Verdurin called ‘lukewarm,’ because he was not making 
any move for a fresh trial, but who, being extremely intelligent, and glad to form 
relations in every camp, was delighted to shew his independence by dining at the 
same table as Labori, to whom he listened without uttering a word that might 
compromise himself, but managed to slip in at the right moment a tribute to the 
loyalty, recognised by all parties, of Jaures. But the Baron had similarly 
proscribed several ladies of the aristocracy whose acquaintance Mme. Verdurin, 
on the occasion of some musical festivity or a collection for charity, had recently 
formed and who, whatever M. de Charlus might think of them, would have been, 
far more than himself, essential to the formation of a fresh nucleus at Mme. 
Verdurin’s, this time aristocratic. Mme. Verdurin had indeed been reckoning 
upon this party, to which M. de Charlus would be bringing her women of the 
same set, to mix her new friends with them, and had been relishing in 
anticipation the surprise that the latter would feel upon meeting at Quai Conti 
their own friends or relatives invited there by the Baron. She was disappointed 
and furious at his veto. It remained to be seen whether the evening, in these 
conditions, would result in profit or loss to herself. The loss would not be too 
serious if only M. de Charlus’s guests came with so friendly a feeling for Mme. 
Verdurin that they would become her friends in the future. In this case the 
mischief would be only half done, these two sections of the fashionable world, 



which the Baron had insisted upon keeping apart, would be united later on, he 
himself being excluded, of course, when the time came. And so Mme. Verdurin 
was awaiting the Baron’s guests with a certain emotion. She would not be slow 
in discovering the state of mind in which they came, and the degree of intimacy 
to which she might hope to attain. While she waited, Mme. Verdurin took 
counsel with the faithful, but, upon seeing M. de Charlus enter the room with 
Brichot and myself, stopped short. Greatly to our astonishment, when Brichot 
told her how sorry he was to learn that her dear friend was so seriously ill, Mme. 
Verdurin replied: “Listen, I am obliged to confess that I am not at all sorry. It is 
useless to pretend to feel what one does not feel.” No doubt she spoke thus from 
want of energy, because she shrank from the idea of wearing a long face 
throughout her party, from pride, in order not to appear to be seeking excuses for 
not having cancelled her invitations, from self-respect also and social aptitude, 
because the absence of grief which she displayed was more honourable if it 
could be attributed to a peculiar antipathy, suddenly revealed, to the Princess, 
rather than to a universal insensibility, and because her hearers could not fail to 
be disarmed by a sincerity as to which there could be no doubt. If Mme. 
Verdurin had not been genuinely unaffected by the death of the Princess, would 
she have gone on to excuse herself for giving the party, by accusing herself of a 
far more serious fault? Besides, one was apt to forget that Mme. Verdurin would 
thus have admitted, while confessing her grief, that she had not had the strength 
of mind to forego a pleasure; whereas the indifference of the friend was 
something more shocking, more immoral, but less humiliating, and consequently 
easier to confess than the frivolity of the hostess. In matters of crime, where the 
culprit is in danger, it is his material interest that prompts the confession. Where 
the fault incurs no penalty, it is self-esteem. Whether it was that, doubtless 
feeling the pretext to be too hackneyed of the people who, so as not to allow a 
bereavement to interrupt their life of pleasure, go about saying that it seems to 
them useless to display the outward signs of a grief which they feel in their 
hearts, Mme. Verdurin preferred to imitate those intelligent culprits who are 
revolted by the commonplaces of innocence and whose defence — a partial 
admission, though they do not know it — consists in saying that they would see 
no harm in doing what they are accused of doing, although, as it happens, they 
have had no occasion to do it; or that, having adopted, to explain her conduct, 
the theory of indifference, she found, once she had started upon the downward 
slope of her unnatural feeling, that it was distinctly original to have felt it, that 
she displayed a rare perspicacity in having managed to diagnose her own 



symptoms, and a certain ‘nerve’ in proclaiming them; anyhow, Mme. Verdurin 
kept dwelling upon her want of grief, not without a certain proud satisfaction, as 
of a paradoxical psychologist and daring dramatist. “Yes, it is very funny,” she 
said, “I hardly felt it. Of course, I don’t mean to say that I wouldn’t rather she 
were still alive, she was not a bad person.” “Yes, she was,” put in M. Verdurin. 
“Ah! He doesn’t approve of her because he thought that I was doing myself 
harm by having her here, but he is quite pig-headed about that.” “Do me the 
justice to admit,” said M. Verdurin, “that I never approved of your having her. I 
always told you that she had a bad reputation.” “But I have never heard a thing 
against her,” protested Saniette. “What!” exclaimed Mme. Verdurin, “everybody 
knew; bad isn’t the word, it was scandalous, appalling. No, it has nothing to do 
with that. I couldn’t explain, myself, what I felt; I didn’t dislike her, but I took so 
little interest in her that, when we heard that she was seriously ill, my husband 
himself was quite surprised, and said: ‘Anyone would think that you didn’t 
mind.’ Why, this evening, he offered to put off the party, and I insisted upon 
having it, because I should have thought it a farce to shew a grief which I do not 
feel.” She said this because she felt that it had a curious smack of the 
‘independent theatre,’ and was at the same time singularly convenient; for an 
admitted insensibility or immorality simplifies life as much as does easy virtue; 
it converts reproachable actions, for which one no longer need seek any excuse, 
into a duty imposed by sincerity. And the faithful listened to Mme. Verdurin’s 
speech with the blend of admiration and misgiving which certain cruelly realistic 
plays, that shewed a profound observation, used at one time to cause, and, while 
they marvelled to see their beloved Mistress display a novel aspect of her 
rectitude and independence, more than one of them, albeit he assured himself 
that after all it would not be the same thing, thought of his own death, and asked 
himself whether, on the day when death came to him, they would draw the blinds 
or give a party at Quai Conti. “I am very glad that the party has not been put off, 
for my guests’ sake,” said M. de Charlus, not realising that in expressing himself 
thus he was offending Mme. Verdurin. Meanwhile I was struck, as was 
everybody who approached Mme. Verdurin that evening, by a far from pleasant 
odour of rhinogomenol. The reason was as follows. We know that Mme. 
Verdurin never expressed her artistic feelings in a moral, but always in a physical 
fashion, so that they might appear more inevitable and more profound. So, if one 
spoke to her of Vinteuil’s music, her favourite, she remained unmoved, as 
though she expected to derive no emotion from it. But after a few minutes of a 
fixed, almost abstracted gaze, in a sharp, matter of fact, scarcely civil tone (as 



though she had said to you: “I don’t in the least mind your smoking, it’s because 
of the carpet; it’s a very fine one [not that that matters either], but it’s highly 
inflammable, I’m dreadfully afraid of fire, and I shouldn’t like to see you all 
roasted because some one had carelessly dropped a cigarette end on it”), she 
replied: “I have no fault to find with Vinteuil; to my mind, he is the greatest 
composer of the age, only I can never listen to that sort of stuff without weeping 
all the time” (she did not apply any pathos to the word 'weeping,’ she would 
have used precisely the same tone for 'sleeping’; certain slandermongers used 
indeed to insist that the latter verb would have been more applicable, though no 
one could ever be certain, for she listened to the music with her face buried in 
her hands, and certain snoring sounds might after all have been sobs). “I don’t 
mind weeping, not in the least; only I get the most appalling colds afterwards. It 
stuffs up my mucous membrane, and the day after I look like nothing on earth. I 
have to inhale for days on end before I can utter. However, one of Cottard’s 
pupils, a charming person, has been treating me for it. He goes by quite an 
original rule: 'Prevention is better than cure.’ And he greases my nose before the 
music begins. It is radical. I can weep like all the mothers who ever lost a child, 
not a trace of a cold. Sometimes a little conjunctivitis, that’s all. It is absolutely 
efficacious. Otherwise I could never have gone on listening to Vinteuil. I was 
just going from one bronchitis to another.” I could not refrain from alluding to 
Mile. Vinteuil. “Isn’t the composer’s daughter to be here,” I asked Mme. 
Verdurin, “with one of her friends?” “No, I have just had a telegram,” Mme. 
Verdurin said evasively, “they have been obliged to remain in the country.” I felt 
a momentary hope that there might never have been any question of their leaving 
it and that Mme. Verdurin had announced the presence of these representatives 
of the composer only in order to make a favourable impression upon the 
performers and their audience. “What, didn’t they come, then, to the rehearsal 
this afternoon?” came with a feigned curiosity from the Baron who was anxious 
to let it appear that he had not seen Charlie. The latter came up to greet me. I 
whispered a question in his ear about Mile. Vinteuil; he seemed to me to know 
little or nothing about her. I signalled to him not to let himself be heard and told 
him that we should discuss the question later on. He bowed, and assured me that 
he would be delighted to place himself entirely at my disposal. I observed that he 
was far more polite, more respectful, than he had been in the past. I spoke 
warmly of him — who might perhaps be able to help me to clear up my 
suspicions — to M. de Charlus who replied: “He only does what is natural, there 
would be no point in his living among respectable people if he didn’t learn good 



manners.” These, according to M. de Charlus, were the old manners of France, 
untainted by any British bluntness. Thus when Charlie, returning from a tour in 
the provinces or abroad, arrived in his travelling suit at the Baron’s, the latter, if 
there were not too many people present, would kiss him without ceremony upon 
both cheeks, perhaps a little in order to banish by so ostentatious a display of his 
affection any idea of its being criminal, perhaps because he could not deny 
himself a pleasure, but still more, doubtless, from a literary sense, as upholding 
and illustrating the traditional manners of France, and, just as he would have 
countered the Munich or modern style of furniture by keeping in his rooms old 
armchairs that had come to him from a great-grandmother, countering the British 
phlegm with the affection of a warm-hearted father of the eighteenth century, 
unable to conceal his joy at beholding his son once more. Was there indeed a 
trace of incest in this paternal affection? It is more probable that the way in 
which M. de Charlus habitually appeased his vicious cravings, as to which we 
shall learn something in due course, was not sufficient for the need of affection, 
which had remained unsatisfied since the death of his wife; the fact remains that 
after having thought more than once of a second marriage, he was now devoured 
by a maniacal desire to adopt an heir. People said that he was going to adopt 
Morel, and there was nothing extraordinary in that. The invert who has been 
unable to feed his passion save on a literature written for women-loving men, 
who used to think of men when he read Mussel’s Nuits, feels the need to partake, 
nevertheless, in all the social activities of the man who is not an invert, to keep a 
lover, as the old frequenter of the Opera keeps ballet-girls, to settle down, to 
marry or form a permanent tie, to become a father.
