99715

The Red Badge of Courage
Stephen Crane
THE EMC MASTERPIECE SERIES
Access Editions
SERIES EDITOR
Laurie Skiba
EMC/Paradigm Publishing
St. Paul, Minnesota
Staff Credits:
for EMC/Paradigm Publishing, St. Paul, Minnesota
for SYP Design & Production, Wenham, Massachusetts
Sara Day Charles Bent
Partner Partner
All photos courtesy of Library of Congress.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Crane, Stephen, 1871–1900.
The red badge of courage / Stephen Crane.
p. cm. -- (The EMC masterpiece series access editions)
Summary: During his service in the Civil War a young Union soldier
matures to manhood and finds peace of mind as he comes to grips with his
conflicting emotions about war.
ISBN 0-8219-1981-4
1. Chancellorsville (Va.), Battle of, 1863 Juvenile fiction.
[1. Chancellorsville (Va.), Battle of, 1863 Fiction. 2. United States--History--
Civil War, 1861–1865 Fiction.] I. Title. II. Series.
PZ7.C852Re 199b
[Fic]--dc21 99-36549
CIP
ISBN 0-8219-1981-4
Copyright © 2000 by EMC Corporation
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be adapted, reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise without permission
from the publisher.
Published by EMC/Paradigm Publishing
875 Montreal Way
St. Paul, Minnesota 55102
800-328-1452
www.emcp.com
E-mail: educate@emcp.com
Printed in the United States of America.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 xxx 05 04 03 02 01 00
Laurie Skiba
Editor
Lori Coleman
Associate Editor
Brenda Owens
Associate Editor
Jennifer Anderson
Assistant Editor
Gia Garbinsky
Assistant Editor
Paul Spencer
Art and Photo Researcher
Chris Nelson
Editorial Assistant
Kristin Melendez
Copy Editor
Sara Hyry
Contributing Writer
Christina Kolb
Contributing Writer
The Life and Works of Stephen Crane. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . v
Time Line of Stephen Crane’s Life . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . viii
The Historical Context of The Red Badge of Courage. . . . . . . x
Understanding the Text . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xiv
Characters in The Red Badge of Courage . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xvi
Echoes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xviii
Illustrations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . xx
Chapter 1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Chapter 2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
Chapter 3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
Chapter 4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
Chapter 5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 35
Chapter 6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42
Chapter 7 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 49
Chapter 8 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 55
Chapter 9 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 60
Chapter 10 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 65
Chapter 11 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 71
Chapter 12 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 77
Chapter 13 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83
Chapter 14 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 89
Chapter 15 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 94
Chapter 16 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 99
Chapter 17 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 105
Chapter 18 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 110
Chapter 19 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 115
Chapter 20 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 121
Chapter 21 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 129
Chapter 22 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 135
Chapter 23 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 140
Chapter 24 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 145
Table of Contents
Plot Analysis of The Red Badge of Courage. . . . . . . . . . . . 152
Creative Writing Activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 156
Critical Writing Activities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 158
Projects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 160
Glossary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 163
Handbook of Literary Terms . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 181
iv THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
THE LIFE AND WORKS OF
Stephen Crane
Stephen Crane (1871–1900) lived only twenty-eight years.
In that time, he earned a reputation as a great American novelist,
poet, and short-story writer; was a forerunner of literary
movements that flourished long after his death; and became
a respected war reporter. Crane met the most noted literary
figures of his day; he lived through a shipwreck and neardeath
at sea; and he became one of America’s most notorious
literary rebels, even angering a future president. Despite so
much action packed into so few years, Crane did have a
regret—that he never became a major league baseball player.
While we can never be sure what the loss to baseball was,
Crane’s chosen profession as a writer helped to spark a revolutionary
change in American literature.
Stephen Crane was born in 1871, in Newark, New Jersey,
the youngest of fourteen children. He had six brothers and
two sisters who survived into early adulthood. Stephen
Crane’s father was a Methodist minister who was already
over fifty when Crane was born. His mother was also a
devout Methodist who wrote for Methodist journals and
papers, often in support of the temperance movement (a
movement that advocated a sober lifestyle and sought to ban
the sale of alcohol). The Crane family moved frequently to
different towns in New Jersey and New York, as Stephen’s
father, the Reverend Crane, moved from church to church.
The Reverend Crane died in 1880, when Stephen was only
eight years old. Stephen’s mother took on more writing projects,
but the family was poor and continued to move frequently,
most likely to escape debt. Stephen had a love of
adventure as a child that sometimes drew him close to danger.
When he was very young, he almost drowned when he tried
to join older boys swimming in a river. Stephen also gained
more first-hand experiences with death. In a town in New
Jersey, he witnessed a woman being stabbed to death by her
romantic partner. One of Stephen’s sisters, who encouraged
his love of reading, died when he was thirteen. A few years
later, one of his brothers died in a gruesome railroad accident.
Despite these experiences, Stephen maintained his high
spirits and was determined to live life as he saw fit. Stephen
attended a number of boarding schools, one of them a military
school. Although bright, he was never an excellent student.
He spent his time reading books other than those
assigned and playing baseball. He was a gifted catcher and
THE LIFE AND WORKS OF STEPHEN CRANE v
Stephen Crane
shortstop who could catch the ball barehanded. In 1890, he
entered Lafayette College to study engineering, but quickly
dropped out. The next year, he entered Syracuse University,
where he followed his passion for reading and writing. He
also continued to play baseball and dreamed of joining the
major leagues despite his poor health. He excelled in English,
but as he enjoyed reading everything but what was assigned
for his classes, the rest of his marks were poor. The summer
after his first year at Syracuse University, Stephen decided
not to go back and to try writing full time.
Crane began writing as a reporter in New York City. Soon
after he launched his career as a reporter his mother died.
Crane was fascinated by the life in the Bowery, one of the
City’s notorious slums. There he drew inspiration for his first
novel, Maggie: A Girl of the Streets, a grim, Naturalistic novel
about an impoverished woman in a desperate situation.
Crane’s novel was too shocking for most publishers.
Impoverished himself, Crane borrowed money against the
small inheritance his mother had left him to publish the
novel himself. Although the novel won the respect of a few
American writers, it earned little critical praise and sold
poorly.
Discouraged, but not willing to give up on his talent,
Crane began reading widely about the Civil War. By 1894, he
had finished The Red Badge of Courage, his best known novel
about a soldier’s experiences in the Union Army during the
Civil War. He sold the novel for ninety dollars to be published
serially (a few chapters at a time) in a number of newspapers.
The Red Badge of Courage was published in its entirety
in a book in 1895. It immediately became a best-seller and
won Crane great critical acclaim. Most people, however, were
stunned to learn that the young man who had written such
a compelling account of war had never seen one. The same
year he published his first book of poetry, The Black Riders.
Crane’s fame startled him, in part because people began to
criticize the way he lived. In 1896, he defended a chorus girl
who was arrested for immoral behavior. Because Crane testified
against police officers, he became a somewhat scandalous
figure. The police commissioner of the City, Theodore
Roosevelt, who would later become president of the United
States, was among Crane’s critics.
Crane escaped his growing notoriety in America and satisfied
his fascination with war by becoming an overseas war
correspondent, reporting on the revolution in Cuba. On his
way to Cuba from Florida, he met and fell in love with Cora
Taylor, a woman with a questionable reputation who had
vi THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
been married twice before (which was considered to be scandalous
in Crane’s day). On December 31, 1896, Crane set off
for Cuba in the steamship Commodore. Two days later the
ship began to sink. Crane, the captain, and ten other sailors
were lowered into the sea in a small lifeboat. After a day in
the lifeboat, they sighted land but the sea was too treacherous
for them to make their way to safety. The boat capsized,
and Crane and the other men struggled to stay alive in the
cold, stormy sea. After someone on land spotted them, the
crew was rescued. On land, Crane read his own obituary.
Crane later immortalized his experiences at sea in the short
story, “The Open Boat.”
On his return, Stephen Crane and Cora Taylor left for
Greece to report on the Greco-Turkish War. They married,
and after the war moved to England, where Crane was
befriended by fellow-American writer Henry James and
British writers H. G. Wells and Joseph Conrad.
In 1898, the Spanish-American war erupted, and Stephen
and Cora returned to the United States. Stephen tried to
enlist in the Navy, but was rejected because of his poor
health. Again, Crane became a war reporter, serving in both
Cuba and Puerto Rico. After the war, Crane stayed in
Havana, Cuba, to begin to write Active Service, a novel about
the Greco-Turkish War. Apparently he contacted neither his
wife nor his brothers, who began to launch official searches
for him. Late in the year 1898, Crane returned to New York
to visit with his family before rejoining Cora in England.
In England, Crane completed and published both Active
Service and another book of poetry, War Is Kind. He also
began an Irish novel, The O’Ruddy, wrote some tales about
the American West, and published The Monster and Other
Studies. Stephen and Cora were spending far beyond their
means and socializing too much for Stephen’s poor health.
To celebrate the end of the nineteenth century, Stephen
and Cora organized a three-day New Year’s party at a manor
they rented. Some of the most noted literary figures of the
day attended, including H. G. Wells, Joseph Conrad, Henry
James, George Gissing, and Rider Haggard. They put on a
play, played games, and celebrated late into the night. On
New Year’s morning one of the guests found Crane, who had
collapsed with a hemorrhaging lung due to tuberculosis, a
chronic and often fatal disease of the lungs.
In 1900, Crane grew stronger, but soon his health deteriorated
again. He went to a health resort in the Black Forest
of Germany to heal. He died there on June 5, 1900, not yet
twenty-nine years old.
THE LIFE AND WORKS OF STEPHEN CRANE vii
Time Line of Stephen Crane’s Life
On November 1, Stephen Crane is born in Newark, New Jersey, to
Reverend Jonathan Townley Crane and Mary Helen Peck Crane. He is
the last of fourteen children, eight of whom survived into young adulthood,
including his sisters Mary Helen and Agnes Elizabeth and his
brothers George Peck, Jonathan Townley, William Howe, Edmund Brian,
Wilbure Fiske, and Luther Peck.
The Crane family moves to Bloomington, New Jersey, to the Reverend
Crane’s new ministry.
The Crane family moves to Paterson, New Jersey, when the Reverend
Crane is appointed pastor of a church there.
The Crane family moves once again to Port Jervis, New York, again following
Reverend Crane to his new pastorate. Crane enters school for the
first time in September.
The Reverend Crane, Stephen’s father, dies on February 16. To earn
money for her family, Mary Helen Peck Crane writes for newspapers and
Methodist journals.
Mary Helen Peck Crane returns to New Jersey with her younger children,
including Stephen.
Stephen’s sister Agnes Elizabeth, who encouraged his interest in literature,
dies.
Stephen enrolls in Pennington Seminary, a boarding school, where his
father had served as principal.
Stephen’s brother Luther Peck is killed when he is crushed between two
rail cars while working for a railroad company.
Stephen transfers to a military boarding school. In the summer, Stephen
writes for a local news bureau run by his brother Jonathan Townley.
Stephen Crane enters Lafayette College in Easton, Pennsylvania, to
study engineering. He leaves midway through the year due to poor
grades.
Stephen enters Syracuse University. During the summer, Stephen
decides to write rather than return to college. He lives with his brother
Edmund Brian, in Lakeview, New York, frequently visits artistic friends
in New York City, and begins writing for newspapers. Stephen begins
writing his first novel Maggie: A Girl of the Streets. Stephen’s mother dies
on December 7.
Stephen Crane works as a freelance writer and publishes sketches with
the New York Tribune. Unable to find a publisher for his first novel, Crane
borrows money against the inheritance left him by his mother to publish
Maggie: A Girl of the Streets on his own.
Stephen Crane publishes Maggie: A Girl of the Streets using the pseudonym,
or pen name, Johnston Smith. Crane reads Civil War literature and
begins writing The Red Badge of Courage.
viii THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
1871
1874
1876
1878
1880
1883
1884
1885
1886
1888
1890
1891
1892
1893
Crane continues to write, beginning George’s Mother. He finds a publisher
for a book of his poetry, and searches for a publisher for The Red Badge of
Courage. Crane finally sells The Red Badge of Courage for ninety dollars. It
is published serially (a few chapters at a time) in a number of newspapers.
D. Appleton and Company then agrees to publish the entire novel.
Crane travels throughout the West and in Mexico, working as a reporter.
He returns home to live at the homes of his brothers in New Jersey in
the summer. Crane’s book of poetry The Black Riders is published. The
Red Badge of Courage is published on October 5 and becomes a best-seller.
The novel wins Crane critical acclaim.
A revised version of Maggie: A Girl of the Streets is published by D.
Appleton and Company, and Edward Arnold, a British publisher, publishes
George’s Mother. Also published is The Little Regiment and Other
Episodes of the American Civil War. Crane agrees to write war stories for
the McClure group of publishers and goes to Cuba to witness and report
on the revolution taking place there. He meets Cora Taylor in Florida.
On December 31, Crane heads for Cuba on the steamship Commodore
that carries weapons for Cuban rebels.
On January 2, the Commodore sinks. Crane later turns this experience
into his story about shipwreck, “The Open Boat.” Crane returns to
Florida and Cora. Crane heads to Greece to cover the Greco-Turkish war,
and Cora, who has been hired by the New York Journal as a war reporter,
meets him there. Cora and Stephen Crane marry and go to London.
Crane returns to New York, where he tries to enlist in the Navy to fight
in the Spanish-American War. Crane agrees to write for Joseph Pulitzer’s
World as a correspondent reporting on the fighting in Cuba. In Cuba,
Crane falls ill with fever and returns to the United States where he recuperates.
Crane is fired by Pulitzer but hired by William Randolph Hearst’s
Journal to report on the fighting in Puerto Rico. At the end of the war,
Crane goes alone to Havana, Cuba, where he begins a novel about the
Greco-Turkish War, Active Service. Toward the end of the year, Crane
returns to New York to visit with family before heading to England again.
Stephen Crane and Cora rent a manor in England. Crane completes
Active Service, which is published later that year, and begins to write an
Irish romance called The O’Ruddy. He writes some short stories set in the
American West, and publishes a book of poems, War Is Kind. The Monster
and Other Stories is published toward the end of the year. The Cranes celebrate
the end of the century with a three-day party. As the party ends,
Stephen Crane collapses with a hemorrhaged lung and tuberculosis.
Crane continues to write, working on The O’Ruddy, but grows more sick
and more worried about deadlines and debt. Stephen Crane completes
his will and goes to a sanitarium in the Black Forest of Germany, where
he dies on June 5, only twenty-eight years old. Cora Crane returns with
her husband’s body to the United States, where he is buried at Hillside,
New Jersey.
TIME LINE OF STEPHEN CRANE’S LIFE ix
1894
1895
1896
1897
1898
1899
1900
THE HISTORICAL CONTEXT OF
The Red Badge of Courage
The Civil War
Born six years after the Civil War ended, Stephen Crane
drew the inspiration for his best-known and most widely
read novel, The Red Badge of Courage, from this terrible conflict.
Sometimes called the War Between the States, the Civil
War was just that—Americans were divided into two groups
roughly along geographic lines. Eleven Southern states
announced that they were officially seceding, breaking away
from the United States to form their own government, called
the Confederate States of America. The North, composed of
twenty-three Northern and Western states, challenged the
Southern states’ right to do so and wanted to keep the nation
intact. The Northern and Southern states clashed in one of
the most bloody wars the United States has ever experienced.
In the decades before war broke out, the Northern and
Southern states were in conflict over political, economic,
social, and moral issues. In the North, the Industrial
Revolution was in full swing; trade in manufactured goods
was the focus of the Northern economy. In the agricultural
South, cash crops like cotton, tobacco, and sugar were the
economic focus. The South also relied on a labor pool of
more than four million enslaved African Americans. While
many Northerners found the institution of slavery reprehensible
and sought to prevent new states from being admitted
as slave states, the war was not fought over the issue of slavery
alone. Increasingly, Southern states were finding themselves
outvoted on issues such as tariffs that favored the economic
interests of Northern states. Southerners were also
enraged when many Northern states passed laws freeing any
slaves who managed to escape to the North. The last straw
for the South was a split in the Democratic party that practically
guaranteed the election of Abraham Lincoln, a
Republican who opposed the spread of slavery and supported
acts that would strengthen the Federal government,
boost the economy in the North, and help to expand the
West. Soon after Lincoln’s election in 1860, Southern states
announced their secession. The first shots of the Civil War
were fired on April 12, 1861, at Fort Sumter, South Carolina.
Both sides had certain advantages and disadvantages. The
x THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
North had a larger population—22 million compared to the
South’s 9 million, of which 4 million were slaves who were
not eager to support the Southern cause. Some of these slaves
fled to the North to claim their freedom and fight for the
Union. The North was able to enlist 2 million soldiers,
including almost 200,000 African Americans, while the
South gathered only 900,000 soldiers. The North also had
much greater manufacturing abilities, and so was able to produce
more weapons, more ammunition, more uniforms,
more medicine, and more shoes for its soldiers. The South,
however, had an advantage in defending land it knew well;
the North had to invade and crush the South into surrender,
but the South merely had to defend its land until the
invaders left. The South also had a proud military heritage
with arguably more skilled officers than the North.
The war ended on April 9, 1865, when General Robert E.
Lee, leader of the Confederate forces, surrendered to U.S.
General Ulysses S. Grant. The war brought an end to the
institution of slavery, and emancipated, or freed, four million
African Americans. It also left the South in ruins: its land
burned and pillaged, its economic system shattered, and its
people demoralized. Out of a nation of about 35 million people,
620,000 men were killed in the war. More Americans
died in the Civil War than in any war since, including World
Wars I and II.
The Battle of Chancellorsville
Crane never calls the two days of battle he chronicles in
The Red Badge of Courage by a specific historical name. Based
on certain details in the story, however, many people believe
that Crane was describing the Battle of Chancellorsville. In
this battle General Joseph “Fighting Joe” Hooker led 130,000
Union soldiers against General Robert E. Lee and 60,000
Confederate soldiers. The battle took place on May 2–4,
1862, in Chancellorsville, Virginia, which lies near the
Potomac River and the Rappahannock River, which is mentioned
in the novel. The land around Chancellorsville was
covered with thick forest, making it difficult for soldiers to
maneuver. Crane portrays the wooded setting and the difficulties
it presents vividly in The Red Badge of Courage.
Although Hooker’s men outnumbered Lee’s, so many Union
soldiers were killed that the Union soldiers retreated. They
THE HISTORICAL CONTEXT OF THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE xi
left behind, however, many dead Confederate soldiers as
well, including one of the most renowned Confederate generals,
Stonewall Jackson.
Life as a Civil War Soldier
Henry Fleming, the main character in this novel, discovers
that war is not like the romantic, daring battles that he
has imagined in dreams. Most Americans came to this realization
during the Civil War. At first, men rushed to enlist
and bought fancy uniforms, modeled on various European
nations’ uniforms. Photography was a new invention, and
soldiers posed in their uniforms for portraits before heading
off to war. Outside Washington, D.C., wealthy people gathered
on hillsides to picnic and watch the battles unfold. This
casual attitude toward war did not last long. Soon people
experienced, or saw in some of the first photographs of war,
the terrible death and destruction that was taking place.
Life as a Civil War soldier was not romantic. Heavy
artillery, or large cannons, fired explosive shells on soldiers
in battle. Bullets were shaped differently than those today,
and were made to shatter bone and flesh. Medicine was less
advanced then, and doctors faced with a soldier shot in the
arm or leg could usually only amputate the limb, not heal it.
Antibiotics were not widely used, so injured men became
infected. Illnesses doctors could not treat also swept through
military encampments. One out of every five Northern soldiers
and one out of every four Southern soldiers died during
the Civil War. In some towns, a whole generation of young
men seemed simply to disappear. Many of these soldiers were
very young, some only fourteen or fifteen years old.
Even when they were not fighting each other or fighting
illness, soldiers still faced difficulties. The soldiers lived in
crude camps in extreme weather conditions. They often fell
short of food, and the food they did have was terrible—some
of it was military rations left from the Mexican War two
decades before, and soldiers complained that it was rotten
and filled with vermin. Often soldiers plundered farms for
food to eat. Romantic military uniforms quickly became tattered
in war. The South, with its lack of manufacturing capability,
was especially hard-pressed for uniforms. By the end of
the war, many Southern soldiers fought barefoot and in little
more than rags. The Union soldiers were only a little better
off.
xii THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
Literary Movements of the Late
Nineteenth Century
Stephen Crane rebelled against Romanticism, a form of
literature that dominated much of the nineteenth century.
American Romantic writers wrote scholarly and often moralistic
works. Their writing was sentimental, nostalgic, idealistic,
and designed to inspire lofty emotions. Crane, on the
other hand, wanted to present his readers with as realistic a
vision of life as possible. In the late nineteenth century, a
movement called Realism was gathering more and more followers,
and Crane’s The Red Badge of Courage is an example of
this type of writing.
Crane’s first novel Maggie: A Girl of the Streets was an early
example of another literary movement that became popular
toward the turn of the twentieth century—Naturalism.
Naturalists believed that actions and events resulted from
biological or natural forces or from forces in the environment.
They presented characters who had little or no
choices; their decisions were predetermined by their environment,
their biological makeup, or both. The Red Badge of
Courage shows certain Naturalistic tendencies as well.
A final movement that was barely beginning at the time
of Crane’s death, and that would later be associated with the
early twentieth century, was Modernism. Modernist writers
sought to express the uncertainty of the modern individuals
who had lost connection to the beliefs and values of the
past. Modernist writing is often fragmented, and themes are
often left ambiguous, creating a sense of uncertainty in the
reader. Modernist writers explored the subconscious mind
through techniques like stream-of-consciousness. Stream-ofconsciousness
writing is literary work that attempts to render
the flow of feelings, thoughts, and impressions within the
minds of characters. Other Modernists, called Imagists, presented
clear snapshots of a moment in time without telling
the reader how to feel about the picture or image but relying
on the image itself to produce emotion in the reader. Other
Modernist writers, known as Surrealists, strove to heighten
awareness by placing together seemingly unrelated images
and forcing the reader or viewer to look for possible connections.
Although The Red Badge of Courage predates most
Modernist works, it does use some Modernist techniques.
THE HISTORICAL CONTEXT OF THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE xiii
Understanding the Text
While The Red Badge of Courage is not a long novel, it presents
some challenges to the reader. The novel was written
more than a hundred years ago and is set in an even earlier
time. Ideas that may have been common in the 1860s are
less common today. Here are some tips that might make passages
in the novel easier for you to understand.
Heroism and honor in war: Behaving with honor in war
and becoming a war hero were dreams commonly held by
young men in the nineteenth century. Many parents and
communities expected young men to go off to war and fight;
it was something a young man did as part of growing up. Far
more young men than today attended military school to
train in the art of war. Soldiers also attached great importance
to their regiment’s flag. It was always carried at the
front of the regiment in battle, and carrying it was a great
honor even though doing so often meant death.
Desertion: While deserting the field of battle is still considered
a very serious crime for a soldier to commit, many people
today may be unaware of how serious a crime it was during
the Civil War. Soldiers were in short supply; every man
was needed. Soldiers who deserted the field of battle and
were caught were punished in a number of ways. Some were
publicly humiliated to teach them a lesson. Other were less
fortunate and were branded with a letter on their faces that
would mark them all their lives. Some deserters paid for their
crime with their lives.
Military terms: The weapons of war and military strategy
were different in the 1860s. Soldiers fought in tight ranks,
shoulder to shoulder. Their weapons were mostly nonrepeating
rifles. This means that after every shot, soldiers
would have to stop and reload their weapons. Their rifles
were also very inaccurate, making it difficult to hit men who
were charging toward them. Rifles, also known as muskets,
were fitted with sharp blades at the end called bayonets.
Often when cavalry or horsemen charged, the men would
steady their rifles so that the horsemen would fall on the
blades. Soldiers also used the bayonets in hand-to-hand combat,
especially because their rifles were so inaccurate. Rather
than bombs, large heavy guns, called artillery, were pulled in
wagons by horses and used to launch exploding shells.
xiv THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
Throughout the novel, many military terms are footnoted. If
you have difficulty understanding the action because of military
terms, ask your teacher for recommendations about
films set in the Civil War. Seeing such films might help you
to envision the military action of the book.
Proper names: The author chose not to refer to his characters
by their given names very often. If you become confused
about the identity of a character, refer to the list of characters
at the beginning of this book.
Dialect: The novel is filled with dialect, writing that imitates
the language spoken by the people of a particular place and
time. This dialect appears in dialogue, or when the characters
are speaking to each other. Crane uses many contractions
and different spellings of words that capture how they were
spoken, rather than how you usually see them written. Some
of this dialect is footnoted. If you have trouble understanding
the dialect, try sounding it out aloud. If you still have difficulty,
skim these passages and use the Guided Reading
Questions as clues to get the general sense of a passage that
gives you trouble.
Vocabulary: Crane’s choice of words is sometimes challenging
for younger readers. Many difficult terms appear as
Words for Everyday Use, at the bottoms of pages and in a
Glossary at the end of this book. If a word you are having
trouble understanding does not appear in these places, try
using the context of the sentence to make a reasonable guess
about the word’s meaning. If the context of the sentence still
does not help you, read on to see if you understand the sense
of the passage as a whole. If you feel that you still do not
understand the passage, look up the word in a dictionary or
ask your teacher for help in understanding the passage.
UNDERSTANDING THE TEXT xv
Characters in
The Red Badge of Courage
Major Characters
Henry Fleming (also called “the youth”). Henry is the
main character, and the novel is told from his perspective.
He enlists in the Union Army dreaming of battle as something
glorious and romantic. His character and how it
changes over the course of the battle is the focus of the
novel.
Wilson (also called “the loud soldier” and, later in the
novel, “the youth’s friend”). Wilson is a soldier in the same
regiment as Henry, the 304th. His outlook toward the world,
and especially toward battle, changes over the course of the
novel. He and Henry become good friends.
Jim Conklin (also called “the tall soldier” and, later in the
novel, “the spectral soldier”). Jim is another soldier in the
304th regiment. He is the soldier who spreads the news that
the regiment will soon see action. He is less confident about
his abilities than Wilson.
The tattered soldier. The tattered soldier is one of the
wounded soldiers whom Henry meets. He is eager to become
Henry’s friend.
Henry’s mother. While Henry’s mother does not take part in
the action of the story, Henry thinks about her in the beginning
of the novel. She is not eager to see her son go to war,
but when he enlists she gives him advice.
xvi THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
CHARACTERS IN THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE xvii
Minor Characters
Lieutenant Hasbrouck (usually called “the lieutenant”).
The lieutenant seems always eager to face battle. At first,
Henry does not like him much, but later comes to respect
him more. The lieutenant is mostly characterized by his
swearing oaths.
Colonel MacChesney (usually called “the colonel”). The
colonel helps to care for Henry after he is injured.
The general. The general always appears on horseback. He
orders the men to perform actions and seems not to care
about the fate of individual men. Later in the book, he orders
the 304th regiment to perform a dangerous action.
The officer. One character, called only “the officer,” insults
the 304th regiment, making Henry very angry.
The veterans. The veteran soldiers as a group are far more
bold and confident than the recruits. They seem to know
what to do in every situation and often mock the more inexperienced
men.
Echoes:
Letters Home—The Voices
of Civil War Soldiers
Note: These excerpts from letters written by Civil War soldiers appear as they
were written, including misspellings and other errors.
Indeed Dear Miss . . . there is thousands of Poor Soldiers that will see
Home & Friends no more in this World If you was in Keokuk & See the
number of Sick & Disabled Soldiers it would make your Heart Ache.
they are Dieing . . . Every Day.
—Newton Scott, a Union soldier, October 24, 1862
Well I am here, as you might say, in the swamps of Louisiana. Am well,
but don’t see any prospect of getting home very soon. I have had the
satisfaction, if it be any, of being shot at by the Rebs. One shell struck
within ten feet of where I stood. Others were lying near me. If it had
exploded, it probably would have sent some of us to our final home. I
tell you, I had very queer feelings, till after the second shot. By that
time I became quite cool and saw the other shots without a tremor.
—Samuel S. Dunton, a Union soldier, February 23, 1863
Whilst we were on our retreat two of our men were carrying [a fellow
soldier named] Sayer who was severely wounded, one of them was
struck by a musket ball stunning him, and letting the wounded man
fall on the ground, his bowels comming out, the other putting them
back as best he could. Then one of the Rhode Island boys took hold
with me and helped. While we were carrying him the R-I-boys arm was
shot away by a cannon ball. A surgeon passing by looked at Sayer &
told us it was no use trying to take him any further as he could not live,
so we left him there.
—Henry F. Ritter, a Union soldier, July 23, 1861
xviii THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
Here we made a stand, & here our company fought absolutely alone . .
our men were subjected to a raking fire. I was the first who fell. I had
put on my spectacles, taken good aim & fired my first shot. As I was in
the act of re-loading, a rifle-ball struck me in the head, a little above the
forehead; & the violence of the concussion felled me to, the earth
immediately. I drew off my s[p]ectacles & flung them aside; & not
believing my wound a bad one, as it was not painful, I attempted to
reload. But the blood was gushing over my face & blinding my eyes; &
I found it impossible to do so. I knew pretty well the extent of my
wound, as I had probed it with my finger as I fell; & as the gash seemed
to be a deep one, I feared faintness would ensue from loss of blood,
especially as there was a large puddle of it where I first lay. So, I put
aside my gun for a while, & put my white handkerchief inside my hat
upon the wound & tied my silk one around the hat. By the time I had
finished these precautions, the company were in retreat; & with Jones
& a few others I made my way to the clump of trees.
—C. Woodward Hutson, a Confederate soldier, July 22, 1861
We have had hard times ever since we came to the vally but still harder
while we was in pennsylvania. We was in Penn something the rise of
three weeks, during that time we was not allowed to unsaddle our horse
or sleep with our shoes off. . . . Penn is the pretiest country I ever seen
or ever expect to see. . . . We had one big battle that was at Gettysburg,
Penn. This was said to be the hardest fight that has been during the war
and Great slaughter on both sides. The ground lay covered with the
dead & wounded for miles.
—Isaac V. Reynolds, a Confederate soldier, July 20, 1863
ECHOES xix
xx THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
Portrait of Private Edwin Francis Jemison, 2nd Louisiana
Regiment, Confederate States of America.
ILLUSTRATIONS xxi
Portrait of Private Robert Patterson, Company D, 12th
Tennessee Infantry, Confederate States of America.
Portrait of an
unidentified
Union soldier
from New York.
Portrait of an
unidentified
Union soldier.
xxii THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
ILLUSTRATIONS xxiii
Portrait of “Drummer” Jackson, 79th U. S. Colored Troops.
Questions for Critical Viewing
• Do the soldiers in these pictures look as if they are new to the
war or as if they have already experienced battle? Explain
your answer.
• What differences do you see between the soldiers in the
Union Army and the soldiers in the Confederate Army? What
similiarities do you see?
• Which of these soldiers most resembles your impression of
Henry Fleming? Jim Conklin? George Wilson? Why?

Chapter 1
The cold passed reluctantly from the earth, and the retiring
fogs revealed an army stretched out on the hills, resting.
As the landscape changed from brown to green, the army
awakened, and began to tremble with eagerness at the noise
of rumors. It cast its eyes upon the roads, which were growing
from long troughs of liquid mud to proper thoroughfares.
A river, amber-tinted in the shadow of its banks, purled
at the army’s feet; and at night, when the stream had become
of a sorrowful blackness, one could see across it the red, eyelike
gleam of hostile campfires set in the low brows of distant
hills.
Once a certain tall soldier developed virtues and went resolutely
to wash a shirt. He came flying back from a brook
waving his garment bannerlike. He was swelled with a tale
he had heard from a reliable friend, who had heard it from a
truthful cavalryman,1 who had heard it from his trustworthy
brother, one of the orderlies2 at division headquarters. He
adopted the important air of a herald3 in red and gold.
“We’re goin’ t’ move t’ morrah4—sure,” he said pompously
to a group in the company street. “We’re goin’ ’way up the
river, cut across, an’ come around in behint ’em.”
To his attentive audience he drew a loud and elaborate
plan of a very brilliant campaign. When he had finished, the
blue-clothed5 men scattered into small arguing groups
between the rows of squat brown huts. A negro teamster6
who had been dancing upon a cracker box7 with the hilarious
encouragement of twoscore8 soldiers was deserted. He sat
CHAPTER 1 1
1. cavalryman. Soldier mounted on horseback
2. orderlies. Soldier assigned to perform various services for a superior officer
3. herald. Officer with the status of an ambassador who serves as a messenger
between opposing forces in a war
4. t’morrah. Tomorrow
5. blue-clothed. During the Civil War, the Union forces wore blue.
6. negro teamster. Negro—term for an African American used in the nineteenth
century, but generally considered to be offensive today; teamster—person
who drives a team or truck as an occupation; here, probably a person who helps
to supply the troops with necessities such as food, weaponry, and clothing
7. cracker box. Boxes were typically made of wood and so were more durable
than the cardboard boxes most food products are shipped in today.
8. twoscore. Forty; a score is twenty
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
trough (trôf) n., conduit, drain, or channel
for water
thor • ough • fare (thər´o￣ far) n., way or
place for passage
purl (pərl) vi., eddy, swirl
pomp • ous • ly (päm´pəs le￣) adv., arrogantly;
in a self-important manner
_ What does the fog
reveal as it lifts?
What is this group of
people doing?
_ What can one see
at night across the
river?
_ In what way do
the men react to the
tall soldier’s news?
mournfully down. Smoke drifted lazily from a multitude of
quaint chimneys.
“It’s a lie! that’s all it is—a thunderin’ lie!” said another
private loudly. His smooth face was flushed, and his hands
were thrust sulkily into his trousers’ pockets. He took the
matter as an affront to him. “I don’t believe the derned old
army’s ever going to move. We’re set. I’ve got ready to move
eight times in the last two weeks, and we ain’t moved yet.”
The tall soldier felt called upon to defend the truth of a
rumor he himself had introduced. He and the loud one came
near to fighting over it.
A corporal began to swear before the assemblage. He had
just put a costly board floor in his house, he said. During the
early spring he had refrained from adding extensively to the
comfort of his environment because he had felt that the
army might start on the march at any moment. Of late, however,
he had been impressed9 that they were in a sort of eternal
camp.
Many of the men engaged in a spirited debate. One outlined
in a peculiarly lucid manner all the plans of the commanding
general. He was opposed by men who advocated
that there were other plans of campaign. They clamored at
each other, numbers making futile bids for the popular
attention. Meanwhile, the soldier who had fetched the
rumor bustled about with much importance. He was continually
assailed by questions.
“What’s up, Jim?”
“Th’ army’s goin’ t’ move.”
“Ah, what yeh talkin’ about? How yeh know it is?”
“Well, yeh kin b’lieve me er not, jest as yeh like. I don’t
care a hang.”10
There was much food for thought in the manner in which
he replied. He came near to convincing them by disdaining
to produce proofs. They grew much excited over it.
There was a youthful private who listened with eager ears
to the words of the tall soldier and to the varied comments
of his comrades. After receiving a fill of discussions concerning
marches and attacks, he went to his hut and crawled
2 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
9. had been impressed. Had been of the impression
10. care a hang. Care a bit
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
lu•cid (lo—_o´səd) adj., clear to the understanding
as • sail (ə sa￣l´) vt., attack violently with
blows or words
dis • dain (dis da￣n´) vt., refuse or abstain
from because of scorn
_ What is the name
of the tall soldier who
spreads the rumor
that the army is
going to move?
_ What does one
“youthful private” do
on hearing the news?
Why does he want to
be alone?
through an intricate hole that served it as a door. He wished
to be alone with some new thoughts that had lately come to
him.
He lay down on a wide bunk that stretched across the end
of the room. In the other end, cracker boxes were made to
serve as furniture. They were grouped about the fireplace. A
picture from an illustrated weekly11 was upon the log walls,
and three rifles were paralleled12 on pegs. Equipments hung
on handy projections, and some tin dishes lay upon a small
pile of firewood. A folded tent was serving as a room. The
sunlight, without, beating upon it, made it glow a light yellow
shade. A small window shot an oblique square of whiter
light upon the cluttered floor. The smoke from the fire at
times neglected the clay chimney and wreathed into the
room, and this flimsy chimney of clay and sticks made endless
threats to set ablaze the whole establishment.
The youth was in a little trance of astonishment. So they
were at last going to fight. On the morrow, perhaps, there
would be a battle, and he would be in it. For a time he was
obliged to labor to make himself believe. He could not accept
with assurance an omen that he was about to mingle in one
of those great affairs of the earth.
He had, of course, dreamed of battles all his life—of vague
and bloody conflicts that had thrilled him with their sweep
and fire. In visions he had seen himself in many struggles.
He had imagined peoples secure in the shadow of his eagleeyed
prowess. But awake he had regarded battles as crimson
blotches on the pages of the past. He had put them as things
of the bygone with his thought-images of heavy crowns and
high castles. There was a portion of the world’s history
which he had regarded as the time of wars, but it, he
thought, had been long gone over the horizon and had disappeared
forever.
From his home his youthful eyes had looked upon the war
in his own country with distrust. It must be some sort of a
play affair. He had long despaired of witnessing a Greeklike
struggle. Such would be no more, he had said. Men were bet-
CHAPTER 1 3
11. illustrated weekly. Weekly periodical with illustrations, such as a magazine
12. paralleled. Hung in parallel, or facing in the same direction with equal
space between them
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
in • tri • cate (in´tri kət) adj., having many
complexly interrelating parts or elements
o • blique (o￣ ble￣k´) adj., neither perpendicular
nor parallel
prow • ess (prau´əs) n., distinguished
bravery; especially military valor and skill
_ What does the
youth have a hard
time believing?
_ In what way does
the youth dream of
battles? What does
he picture himself
doing? Do his visions
seem realistic?
_ What does the
youth think about
war when he is
awake?
_ Why is the youth
skeptical of the war
taking place now?
ter, or more timid. Secular and religious education had
effaced the throat-grappling instinct, or else firm finance
held in check the passions.
He had burned several times to enlist. Tales of great movements
shook the land. They might not be distinctly
Homeric,13 but there seemed to be much glory in them. He
had read of marches, sieges, conflicts, and he had longed to
see it all. His busy mind had drawn for him large pictures
extravagant in color, lurid14 with breathless deeds.
But his mother had discouraged him. She had affected to
look with some contempt upon the quality of his war ardor
and patriotism. She could calmly seat herself and with no
apparent difficulty give him many hundreds of reasons why
he was of vastly more importance on the farm than on the
field of battle. She had had certain ways of expression that
told him that her statements on the subject came from a
deep conviction. Moreover, on her side, was his belief that
her ethical motive in the argument was impregnable.
At last, however, he had made firm rebellion against this
yellow light thrown upon the color of his ambitions. The
newspapers, the gossip of the village, his own picturings, had
aroused him to an uncheckable degree. They were in truth
fighting finely down there. Almost every day the newspapers
printed accounts of a decisive victory.
One night, as he lay in bed, the winds had carried to him
the clangoring of the church bell as some enthusiast jerked
the rope frantically to tell the twisted news of a great battle.
This voice of the people rejoicing in the night had made him
shiver in a prolonged ecstasy of excitement. Later, he had
gone down to his mother’s room and had spoken thus: “Ma,
I’m going to enlist.”
“Henry, don’t you be a fool,” his mother had replied. She
had then covered her face with the quilt. There was an end
to the matter for that night.
Nevertheless, the next morning he had gone to a town
that was near his mother’s farm and had enlisted in a company
that was forming there. When he had returned home
his mother was milking the brindle cow.15 Four others stood
4 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
13. Homeric. Like the ancient Greek poet’s epic about the Trojan War, the Iliad.
The descriptions of battle in this work are lofty.
14. lurid. Sensational
15. brindle cow. Cow with dark streaks or spots on its skin WWords
For
Everyday
Use
sec • u • lar (se´kyə lər) adj., not overtly
or specifically religious
ef • face (e fa￣s´) vt., cause to vanish
ar • dor (är´dər) n., extreme vigor or
energy; zeal
im • preg • na • ble (im preg´nə bəl)
adj., incapable of being taken by assault;
unconquerable
_ Who discouraged
the youth from
joining the army?
According to this
person, where was
the youth needed
more?
_ According to the
newspapers, how is
the war progressing
for the youth’s side,
the Union?
_ What is the
youth’s name? What
is his mother’s
response when he
expresses a desire to
enlist in the Union
army?
waiting. “Ma, I’ve enlisted,” he had said to her diffidently.
There was a short silence. “The Lord’s will be done, Henry,”
she had finally replied, and had then continued to milk the
brindle cow.
When he had stood in the doorway with his soldier’s
clothes on his back, and with the light of excitement and
expectancy in his eyes almost defeating the glow of regret for
the home bonds, he had seen two tears leaving their trails on
his mother’s scarred cheeks.
Still, she had disappointed him by saying nothing whatever
about returning with his shield or on it.16 He had privately
primed himself for a beautiful scene. He had prepared
certain sentences which he thought could be used with
touching effect. But her words destroyed his plans. She had
doggedly peeled potatoes and addressed him as follows: “You
watch out, Henry, an’ take good care of yerself in this here
fighting business—you watch out, an’ take good care of yerself.
Don’t go a-thinkin’ you can lick the hull17 rebel army at
the start, because yeh can’t. Yer jest one little feller amongst
a hull lot of others, and yeh’ve got to keep quiet an’ do what
they tell yeh. I know how you are, Henry.
“I’ve knet18 yeh eight pair of socks, Henry, and I’ve put in
all yer best shirts, because I want my boy to be jest as warm
and comf’able as anybody in the army. Whenever they get
holes in ’em, I want yeh to send ’em right-away back to me,
so’s I kin dern19 ’em.
“An’ allus be careful an’ choose yer comp’ny. There’s lots
of bad men in the army, Henry. The army makes ’em wild,
and they like nothing better than the job of leading off a
young feller like you, as ain’t never been away from home
much and has allus had a mother, an’ a-learning ’im to drink
and swear. Keep clear of them folks, Henry. I don’t want yeh
to ever do anything, Henry, that yeh would be ’shamed to let
me know about. Jest think as if I was a-watchin’ yeh. If yeh
keep that in yer mind allus, I guess yeh’ll come out about
right.
CHAPTER 1 5
16. returning with his shield or on it. In Greek literature, soldiers going off to
war were advised to return alive (with shield) or dead (carried on the shield).
17. Lick the hull. Lick—beat in a fight; hull—whole
18. knet. Knit
19. dern. Darn; repair the holes in WWords
For
Everyday
Use
prime (pr_￣m) vt., instruct beforehand; coach
dog • ged • ly (dô´gəd le￣) adv., in a manner marked by
stubborn determination
_ What is the
mother’s reaction
when Henry tells her
he has enlisted?
_ What reveals that
Henry’s decision has
an emotional effect
on his mother?
_ What advice does
Henry’s mother give
him? What type of
scene had Henry
pictured instead?
“Yeh must allus remember yer father, too, child, an’
remember he never drunk a drop of licker20 in his life, and
seldom swore a cross oath.
“I don’t know what else to tell yeh, Henry, excepting that
yeh must never do no shirking, child, on my account. If so
be a time comes when yeh have to be kilt or do a mean
thing, why, Henry, don’t think of anything ’cept what’s
right, because there’s many a woman has to bear up ’ginst
sech things these times, and the Lord ’ll take keer21 of us all.
“Don’t forgit about the socks and the shirts, child; and
I’ve put a cup of blackberry jam with yer bundle, because I
know yeh like it above all things. Good-by, Henry. Watch
out, and be a good boy.”
He had, of course, been impatient under the ordeal of this
speech. It had not been quite what he expected, and he had
borne it with an air of irritation. He departed feeling vague
relief.
Still, when he had looked back from the gate, he had seen
his mother kneeling among the potato parings. Her brown
face, upraised, was stained with tears, and her spare form was
quivering. He bowed his head and went on, feeling suddenly
ashamed of his purposes.
From his home he had gone to the seminary22 to bid
adieu23 to many schoolmates. They had thronged about him
with wonder and admiration. He had felt the gulf now
between them and had swelled with calm pride. He and
some of his fellows who had donned24 blue were quite overwhelmed
with privileges for all of one afternoon, and it had
been a very delicious thing. They had strutted.
A certain light-haired girl had made vivacious fun at his
martial spirit, but there was another and darker girl whom he
had gazed at steadfastly, and he thought she grew demure
and sad at sight of his blue and brass. As he had walked
down the path between the rows of oaks, he had turned his
head and detected her at a window watching his departure.
As he perceived her, she had immediately begun to stare up
through the high tree branches at the sky. He had seen a
6 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
20. licker. Liquor
21. keer. Care
22. seminary. Local school
23. adieu. Goodbye
24. donned. Put on (an article of clothing) WWords
For
Everyday
Use
shirk (sh_rk) vi., evade the performance of
an obligation
spare (spa￣r) adj., healthily lean
throng (thrôŋ) vi., crowd together in
great numbers
de • mure (di myur´) adj., reserved, modest,
serious
_ What makes
Henry ashamed?
_ How do Henry’s
classmates react to
his decision to join
the army? How does
this make Henry and
the other new
recruits feel?
_ What does Henry
often think of?
good deal of flurry and haste in her movement as she
changed her attitude. He often thought of it.
On the way to Washington his spirit had soared. The regiment25
was fed and caressed at station after station until the
youth had believed that he must be a hero. There was a lavish
expenditure of bread and cold meats, coffee, and pickles
and cheese. As he basked in the smiles of the girls and was
patted and complimented by the old men, he had felt growing
within him the strength to do mighty deeds of arms.
After complicated journeyings with many pauses, there
had come months of monotonous life in a camp. He had had
the belief that real war was a series of death struggles with
small time in between for sleep and meals; but since his regiment
had come to the field the army had done little but sit
still and try to keep warm.
He was brought then gradually back to his old ideas.
Greeklike struggles would be no more. Men were better, or
more timid. Secular and religious education had effaced the
throat-grappling instinct, or else firm finance held in check
the passions.
He had grown to regard himself merely as a part of a vast
blue demonstration. His province was to look out, as far as
he could, for his personal comfort. For recreation he could
twiddle his thumbs and speculate on the thoughts which
must agitate the minds of the generals. Also, he was drilled
and drilled and reviewed,26 and drilled and drilled and
reviewed.
The only foes he had seen were some pickets27 along the
river bank. They were a sun-tanned, philosophical lot, who
sometimes shot reflectively28 at the blue pickets. When
reproached for this afterward, they usually expressed sorrow,
and swore by their gods that the guns had exploded
without their permission. The youth, on guard duty one
night, conversed across the stream with one of them. He
was a slightly ragged man, who spat skillfully between his
CHAPTER 1 7
25. regiment. Military unit consisting of a number of troops
26. drilled and reviewed. Drill—Train military maneuvers again and again;
reviewed—undergo formal military inspections
27. pickets. Sentries, or soldiers who stand guard over a point of passage
28. reflectively. In an unhurried, contemplative way
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
lav • ish (la´vish) adj., spending or giving
generously
ex • pen • di • ture (ek spen´di chər) n.,
act or process of expending; outlay
mo • not • o • nous (mə nä´t_n əs) adj.,
tediously uniform or unvarying
prov • ince (pro´vints) n., proper or
appropriate function or scope; department
of knowledge or activity
_ What makes
Henry think of
himself as a hero?
_ What surprises
Henry about army
life thus far?
_ What is Henry’s
attitude toward what
he has seen of the
enemy so far?
shoes and possessed a great fund of bland and infantile
assurance. The youth liked him personally.
“Yank,”29 the other had informed him, “yer a right dum
good feller.” This sentiment, floating to him upon the still
air, had made him temporarily regret war.
Various veterans had told him tales. Some talked of gray,
bewhiskered hordes who were advancing with relentless
curses and chewing tobacco with unspeakable valor; tremendous
bodies of fierce soldiery who were sweeping along like
the Huns.30 Others spoke of tattered and eternally hungry
men who fired despondent powders. “They’ll charge
through hell’s fire an’ brimstone t’ git a holt on a haversack,
31 an’ sech stomachs ain’t a-lastin’ long,” he was told.
From the stories, the youth imagined the red, live bones
sticking out through slits in the faded uniforms.
Still, he could not put a whole faith in veterans’ tales, for
recruits were their prey. They talked much of smoke, fire, and
blood, but he could not tell how much might be lies. They
persistently yelled “Fresh fish!” at him, and were in no wise
to be trusted.
However, he perceived now that it did not greatly matter
what kind of soldiers he was going to fight, so long as they
fought, which fact no one disputed. There was a more serious
problem. He lay in his bunk pondering upon it. He tried
to mathematically prove to himself that he would not run
from a battle.
Previously he had never felt obliged to wrestle too seriously
with this question. In his life he had taken certain
things for granted, never challenging his belief in ultimate
success, and bothering little about means and roads. But here
he was confronted with a thing of moment. It had suddenly
appeared to him that perhaps in a battle he might run. He
was forced to admit that as far as war was concerned he knew
nothing of himself.
A sufficient time before he would have allowed the problem
to kick its heels at the outer portals of his mind, but now
he felt compelled to give serious attention to it.
8 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
29. Yank. Yankee, native of New England
30. Huns. Members of a nomadic central Asian people who gained control of a
large part of central and eastern Europe under Attila the Hun around AD 450. The
Huns were considered very destructive.
31. haversack. Bag similar to a knapsack worn over one shoulder WWords
For
Everyday
Use
in • fan • tile (in´fən t_￣l) adj., suitable to
or characteristic of an infant; very immature
horde (ho￣rd) n., crowd or throng
de • spon • dent (di spən´dənt) adj., feeling
or showing extreme discouragement,
dejection, or depression
por • tal (po￣r´təl,) n., door, entrance
_ Why doesn’t
Henry believe the
veterans’ stories
about fierce and
hungry members of
the opposing forces?
_ What serious
problem concerns
Henry?
A little panic-fear grew in his mind. As his imagination
went forward to a fight, he saw hideous possibilities. He contemplated
the lurking menaces of the future, and failed in an
effort to see himself standing stoutly in the midst of them.
He recalled his visions of broken-bladed glory, but in the
shadow of the impending tumult he suspected them to be
impossible pictures.
He sprang from the bunk and began to pace nervously to
and fro. “Good Lord, what’s th’ matter with me?” he said
aloud.
He felt that in this crisis his laws of life were useless.
Whatever he had learned of himself was here of no avail. He
was an unknown quantity. He saw that he would again be
obliged to experiment as he had in early youth. He must
accumulate information of himself, and meanwhile he
resolved to remain close upon his guard lest those qualities
of which he knew nothing should everlastingly disgrace
him. “Good Lord!” he repeated in dismay.
After a time the tall soldier slid dexterously through the
hole. The loud private followed. They were wrangling.32
“That’s all right,” said the tall soldier as he entered. He
waved his hand expressively. “You can believe me or not, jest
as you like. All you got to do is to sit down and wait as quiet
as you can. Then pretty soon you’ll find out I was right.”
His comrade grunted stubbornly. For a moment he
seemed to be searching for a formidable reply. Finally he
said: “Well, you don’t know everything in the world, do
you?”
“Didn’t say I knew everything in the world,” retorted the
other sharply. He began to stow various articles snugly into
his knapsack.
The youth, pausing in his nervous walk, looked down at
the busy figure. “Going to be a battle, sure, is there, Jim?” he
asked.
“Of course there is,” replied the tall soldier. “Of course
there is. You jest wait ’til to-morrow, and you’ll see one of the
biggest battles ever was. You jest wait.”
“Thunder!” said the youth.
“Oh, you’ll see fighting this time, my boy, what’ll be regular
out-and-out fighting,” added the tall soldier, with the air
CHAPTER 1 9
32. wrangling. Arguing WWords
For
Everyday
Use
stout • ly (stout´le￣) adv., bravely, boldly
dex • ter • ous • ly (dek´stə rəs le￣) adv.,
skillfully
for • mi • da • ble (fôr´mə də bəl) adj.,
having qualities that discourage approach
or attack
stow (sto￣) vt., put away for future use;
store
_ What is Henry
beginning to feel?
Why does he feel this
way?
_ Why can’t Henry
tell how he will react
in battle?
_ What attitude
does Jim, the tall
soldier, seem to have
toward the idea of
fighting in battle?
of a man who is about to exhibit a battle for the benefit of
his friends.
“Huh!” said the loud one from a corner.
“Well,” remarked the youth, “like as not this story’ll turn
out jest like them others did.”
“Not much it won’t,” replied the tall soldier, exasperated.
“Not much it won’t. Didn’t the cavalry all start this morning?”
He glared about him. No one denied his statement.
“The cavalry started this morning,” he continued. “They say
there ain’t hardly any cavalry left in camp. They’re going to
Richmond,33 or some place, while we fight all the Johnnies.34
It’s some dodge like that. The regiment’s got orders, too. A
feller what seen ’em go to headquarters told me a little while
ago. And they’re raising blazes all over camp—anybody can
see that.”
“Shucks!” said the loud one.
The youth remained silent for a time. At last he spoke to
the tall soldier. “Jim!”
“What?”
“How do you think the reg’ment ’ll do?”
“Oh, they’ll fight all right, I guess, after they once get into
it,” said the other with cold judgment. He made a fine use of
the third person. “There’s been heaps of fun poked at ’em
because they’re new, of course, and all that; but they’ll fight
all right, I guess.”
“Think any of the boys ’ll run?” persisted the youth.
“Oh, there may be a few of ’em run, but there’s them kind
in every regiment, ’specially when they first goes under fire,”
said the other in a tolerant way. “Of course it might happen
that the hull kit-and-boodle35 might start and run, if some
big fighting came first-off, and then again they might stay
and fight like fun. But you can’t bet on nothing. Of course
they ain’t never been under fire36 yet, and it ain’t likely
they’ll lick the hull rebel army all-to-oncet37 the first time;
but I think they’ll fight better than some, if worse than oth-
10 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
33. Richmond. City in Virginia
34. Johnnies. “Johnny Rebs” was the nickname Union troops gave to
Confederate soldiers.
35. kit-and-boodle. Kit and caboodle, meaning a group of persons or things
36. under fire. Under attack
37. all-to-oncet. All at once
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
ex • as • per • at • ed (eg zas´pə ra￣t əd) adj., irritated,
annoyed
_ What evidence
does Jim point out to
support the rumor
that their group will
see fighting soon?
_ What is Jim’s
opinion about how
the new soldiers will
do in battle?
ers. That’s the way I figger. They call the reg’ment ‘Fresh fish’
and everything; but the boys come of good stock, and most
of ’em ’ll fight like sin after they oncet git shootin’,” he
added, with a mighty emphasis on the last four words.
“Oh, you think you know—” began the loud soldier with
scorn.
The other turned savagely upon him. They had a rapid
altercation, in which they fastened upon each other various
strange epithets.
The youth at last interrupted them. “Did you ever think
you might run yourself, Jim?” he asked. On concluding the
sentence he laughed as if he had meant to aim a joke. The
loud soldier also giggled.
The tall private waved his hand. “Well,” said he profoundly,
“I’ve thought it might get too hot for Jim Conklin
in some of them scrimmages, and if a whole lot of boys
started and run, why, I s’pose I’d start and run. And if I once
started to run, I’d run like the devil, and no mistake. But if
everybody was a-standing and a-fighting, why, I’d stand and
fight. Be jiminey,38 I would. I’ll bet on it.”
“Huh!” said the loud one.
The youth of this tale felt gratitude for these words of his
comrade. He had feared that all of the untried men possessed
a great and correct confidence. He now was in a measure
reassured.
CHAPTER 1 11
38. Be jiminey. An exclamation
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
al • ter • ca • tion (äl tər ka￣´shən) n.,
noisy heated angry dispute
ep • i • thet (e´pə thet) n., disparaging or
abusive word or phrase
scrim • mage (skri´mij) n., minor battle;
confused fight
_ What does Henry
ask Jim? What is
Jim’s response? Why
do you think Henry
asks this question?
Chapter 2
The next morning the youth discovered that his tall comrade
had been the fast-flying messenger of a mistake. There
was much scoffing at the latter by those who had yesterday
been firm adherents of his views, and there was even a little
sneering by men who had never believed the rumor. The tall
one fought with a man from Chatfield Corners and beat him
severely.
The youth felt, however, that his problem was in no wise1
lifted from him. There was, on the contrary, an irritating prolongation.
The tale had created in him a great concern for
himself. Now, with the newborn question in mind, he was
compelled to sink back into his old place as part of a blue
demonstration.
For days he made ceaseless calculations, but they were all
wondrously unsatisfactory. He found that he could establish
nothing. He finally concluded that the only way to prove
himself was to go into the blaze, and then figuratively to
watch his legs to discover their merits and faults. He reluctantly
admitted that he could not sit still and with a mental
slate and pencil derive an answer. To gain it, he must have
blaze, blood, and danger, even as a chemist requires this,
that, and the other. So he fretted for an opportunity.
Meanwhile he continually tried to measure himself by his
comrades. The tall soldier, for one, gave him some assurance.
This man’s serene unconcern dealt him a measure of confidence,
for he had known him since childhood, and from his
intimate knowledge he did not see how he could be capable
of anything that was beyond him, the youth. Still, he
thought that his comrade might be mistaken about himself.
Or, on the other hand, he might be a man heretofore
doomed to peace and obscurity, but, in reality, made to shine
in war.
The youth would have liked to have discovered another
who suspected himself. A sympathetic comparison of mental
notes would have been a joy to him.
He occasionally tried to fathom a comrade with seductive
12 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
1. wise. Manner, way
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
scoff (skôf) vt., show contempt; mock
ad • her • ent (ad hir´ənt) n., believer in,
especially of a particular idea or church;
follower
fret (fret) vi., become vexed or worried
fath • om (fa´thəm) vt., penetrate and
come to understand
_ What is the only
way the youth can
prove himself? What
is he eager to do?
_ To what type of
person does the
youth long to talk?
sentences. He looked about to find men in the proper mood.
All attempts failed to bring forth any statement which
looked in any way like a confession to those doubts which
he privately acknowledged in himself. He was afraid to make
an open declaration of his concern, because he dreaded to
place some unscrupulous confidant upon the high plane of
the unconfessed from which elevation he could be derided.
In regard to his companions his mind wavered between
two opinions, according to his mood. Sometimes he inclined
to believing them all heroes. In fact, he usually admitted in
secret the superior development of the higher qualities in
others. He could conceive of men going very insignificantly
about the world bearing a load of courage unseen, and
although he had known many of his comrades through boyhood,
he began to fear that his judgment of them had been
blind. Then, in other moments, he flouted these theories,
and assured himself that his fellows were all privately wondering
and quaking.
His emotions made him feel strange in the presence of
men who talked excitedly of a prospective battle as of a
drama they were about to witness, with nothing but eagerness
and curiosity apparent in their faces. It was often that
he suspected them to be liars.
He did not pass such thoughts without severe condemnation
of himself. He dinned2 reproaches at times. He was convicted
by himself of many shameful crimes against the gods
of traditions.
In his great anxiety his heart was continually clamoring at
what he considered the intolerable slowness of the generals.
They seemed content to perch tranquilly on the river bank,
and leave him bowed down by the weight of a great problem.
He wanted it settled forthwith. He could not long bear
such a load, he said. Sometimes his anger at the commanders
reached an acute stage, and he grumbled about the camp like
a veteran.
One morning, however, he found himself in the ranks of
his prepared regiment. The men were whispering speculations
and recounting the old rumors. In the gloom before
the break of the day their uniforms glowed a deep purple
CHAPTER 2 13
2. dinned. Impress by constant repetition
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
un • scru • pu • lous (un skro—_o´pyə ləs)
adj., unethical, dishonest
flout (flout) vt., treat with contemptuous
disregard; scorn
pro • spec • tive (prə spek´tiv) adj., likely
to come about; expected
clam • or (kla´mər) vi., become loudly
insistent
_ Why doesn’t he
openly acknowledge
his fear?
_ What two
opinions does he
have about his fellow
soldiers?
_ When does the
youth suspect that
the other soldiers are
liars?
hue. From across the river the red eyes were still peering. In
the eastern sky there was a yellow patch like a rug laid for the
feet of the coming sun; and against it, black and patternlike,
loomed the gigantic figure of the colonel on a gigantic horse.
From off in the darkness came the trampling of feet. The
youth could occasionally see dark shadows that moved like
monsters. The regiment stood at rest for what seemed a long
time. The youth grew impatient. It was unendurable the way
these affairs were managed. He wondered how long they
were to be kept waiting.
As he looked all about him and pondered upon the mystic
gloom, he began to believe that at any moment the ominous
distance might be aflare, and the rolling crashes of an
engagement come to his ears. Staring once at the red eyes
across the river, he conceived them to be growing larger, as
the orbs of a row of dragons advancing. He turned toward
the colonel and saw him lift his gigantic arm and calmly
stroke his mustache.
At last he heard from along the road at the foot of the hill
the clatter of a horse’s galloping hoofs. It must be the coming
of orders. He bent forward, scarce breathing. The exciting
clickety-click, as it grew louder and louder, seemed to be
beating upon his soul. Presently a horseman with jangling
equipment drew rein before the colonel of the regiment. The
two held a short, sharp-worded conversation. The men in
the foremost ranks craned their necks.
As the horseman wheeled his animal and galloped away
he turned to shout over his shoulder, “Don’t forget that box
of cigars!” The colonel mumbled in reply. The youth wondered
what a box of cigars had to do with war.
A moment later the regiment went swinging off into the
darkness. It was now like one of those moving monsters
wending with many feet. The air was heavy, and cold with
dew. A mass of wet grass, marched upon, rustled like silk.
There was an occasional flash and glimmer of steel from
the backs of all these huge crawling reptiles. From the road
came creakings and grumblings as some surly guns were
dragged away.
The men stumbled along still muttering speculations.
There was a subdued debate. Once a man fell down, and as
he reached for his rifle a comrade, unseeing, trod upon his
14 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
om • i • nous (ô´mə nəs) adj., foreboding
or foreshadowing something, usually evil
orb (ôrb) n., eye
wend (wend) vi., travel
sur • ly (sər´le￣) adj., menacing or threatening
in appearance
sub • dued (səb do—_od´) adj., lacking in
vitality, intensity, or strength
_ What does the
youth expect to see
and hear “at any
moment”?
_ What emotions do
the approaching
horseman and his
conversation with the
colonel create in the
youth and the other
soldiers?
_ What is revealed
of the colonel and
the horseman’s
discussion?
_ What does the
regiment finally
begin to do?
_ In what way is
one man injured?
hand. He of the injured fingers swore bitterly and aloud. A
low, tittering laugh went among his fellows.
Presently they passed into a roadway and marched forward
with easy strides. A dark regiment moved before them,
and from behind also came the tinkle of equipments on the
bodies of marching men.
The rushing yellow of the developing day went on behind
their backs. When the sunrays at last struck full and mellowingly
upon the earth, the youth saw that the landscape was
streaked with two long, thin, black columns which disappeared
on the brow of a hill in front and rearward vanished
in a wood. They were like two serpents crawling from the
cavern of the night.
The river was not in view. The tall soldier burst into
praises of what he thought to be his powers of perception.
Some of the tall one’s companions cried with emphasis
that they, too, had evolved the same thing, and they congratulated
themselves upon it. But there were others who
said that the tall one’s plan was not the true one at all. They
persisted with other theories. There was a vigorous discussion.
The youth took no part in them. As he walked along in
careless line he was engaged with his own eternal debate. He
could not hinder himself from dwelling upon it. He was
despondent and sullen, and threw shifting glances about
him. He looked ahead, often expecting to hear from the
advance the rattle of firing.
But the long serpents crawled slowly from hill to hill without
bluster of smoke. A dun-colored cloud of dust floated
away to the right. The sky overhead was of a fairy blue.
The youth studied the faces of his companions, ever on
the watch to detect kindred emotions. He suffered disappointment.
Some ardor of the air which was causing the veteran
commands to move with glee—almost with song—had
infected the new regiment. The men began to speak of victory
as of a thing they knew. Also, the tall soldier received his
vindication. They were certainly going to come around in
behind the enemy. They expressed commiseration for that
part of the army which had been left upon the river bank,
felicitating themselves upon being a part of a blasting host.
The youth, considering himself as separated from the
CHAPTER 2 15 WWords
For
Everyday
Use
blus • ter (blus´tər) n., violent commotion
dun (dun) adj., having a dull grayish yellow
color
com • mis • er • a • tion (kə mi zə
ra￣´shən) n., sympathy; compassion
fe • lic • i • tate (fi li´sə ta￣t) vt., offer congratulations
to
_ What do the
columns of men look
like?
_ In what way is the
tall soldier
“vindicated”?
others, was saddened by the blithe and merry speeches that
went from rank to rank. The company wags3 all made their
best endeavors. The regiment tramped to the tune of laughter.
The loud soldier often convulsed whole files by his biting
sarcasms4 aimed at the tall one.
And it was not long before all the men seemed to forget
their mission. Whole brigades5 grinned in unison, and regiments
laughed.
A rather fat soldier attempted to pilfer a horse from a
dooryard. He planned to load his knapsack upon it. He was
escaping with his prize when a young girl rushed from the
house and grabbed the animal’s mane. There followed a
wrangle. The young girl, with pink cheeks and shining eyes,
stood like a dauntless statue.
The observant regiment, standing at rest in the roadway,
whooped at once, and entered whole-souled upon the side of
the maiden. The men became so engrossed in this affair that
they entirely ceased to remember their own large war. They
jeered the piratical private, and called attention to various
defects in his personal appearance; and they were wildly
enthusiastic in support of the young girl.
To her, from some distance, came bold advice. “Hit him
with a stick.”
There were crows and catcalls6 showered upon him when
he retreated without the horse. The regiment rejoiced at his
downfall. Loud and vociferous congratulations were showered
upon the maiden, who stood panting and regarding the
troops with defiance.
At nightfall the column broke into regimental pieces, and
the fragments went into the fields to camp. Tents sprang up
like strange plants. Camp fires, like red, peculiar blossoms,
dotted the night.
The youth kept from intercourse with his companions as
much as circumstances would allow him. In the evening he
16 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
3. wags. Young men, usually jokers
4. convulsed . . . sarcasms. The loud soldier makes the lines of soldiers laugh
by his mocking remarks of the tall soldier.
5. brigades. Large bodies of troops
6. crows and catcalls. Crow—sound made to rejoice over another person’s distress;
catcalls—loud cry to express disapproval
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
blithe (bl_￣th) adj., lighthearted; merry
pil • fer (pil´fər) vt., steal
daunt • less (dônt´ləs) adj., fearless
en • grossed (en gro￣sd´) adj., completely
occupied, engaged, or involved
vo • cif • er • ous (vo￣ si´fər us) adj., noisy,
loud
_ Why do you think
the youth considers
himself to be
separated from the
others?
_ What do the
soldiers watch to
entertain themselves?
_ Whom do the
soldiers support in
this confrontation?
wandered a few paces into the gloom. From this little distance
the many fires, with the black forms of men passing to
and fro before the crimson rays, made weird and satanic
effects.
He lay down in the grass. The blades pressed tenderly
against his cheek. The moon had been lighted and was hung
in a treetop. The liquid stillness of the night enveloping him
made him feel vast pity for himself. There was a caress in the
soft winds; and the whole mood of the darkness, he thought,
was one of sympathy for himself in his distress.
He wished, without reserve, that he was at home again
making the endless rounds from the house to the barn, from
the barn to the fields, from the fields to the barn, from the
barn to the house. He remembered he had often cursed the
brindle cow and her mates, and had sometimes flung milking
stools. But, from his present point of view, there was a
halo of happiness about each of their heads, and he would
have sacrificed all the brass buttons7 on the continent to
have been enabled to return to them. He told himself that he
was not formed for a soldier. And he mused seriously upon
the radical differences between himself and those men who
were dodging implike around the fires.
As he mused thus he heard the rustle of grass, and, upon
turning his head, discovered the loud soldier. He called out,
“Oh, Wilson!”
The latter approached and looked down.
“Why, hello, Henry; is it you? What you doing here?”
“Oh, thinking,” said the youth.
The other sat down and carefully lighted his pipe. “You’re
getting blue, my boy. You’re looking thundering peeked.8
What the dickens is wrong with you?”
“Oh, nothing,” said the youth.
The loud soldier launched then into the subject of the
anticipated fight. “Oh, we’ve got ’em now!” As he spoke his
boyish face was wreathed in a gleeful smile, and his voice
had an exultant ring. “We’ve got ’em now. At last, by the
eternal thunders, we’ll lick ’em good!”
CHAPTER 2 17
7. brass buttons. Symbol of rank on a military uniform
8. peeked. Peaked, or sickly
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
muse (myo—_oz) vt., become absorbed in thought
ex • ul • tant (eg zul´tənt) adj., joyful, triumphant
_ Where does the
youth wish he were
again? What does he
tell himself?
_ What is the loud
soldier’s name?
_ How does the loud
soldier, Wilson, feel
about his regiment’s
chances in the
upcoming battle?
How have previous
battles gone for their
side?
“If the truth was known,” he added, more soberly, “they’ve
licked us about every clip9 up to now; but this time—this
time—we’ll lick ’em good!
“I thought you was objecting to this march a little while
ago,” said the youth coldly.
“Oh, it wasn’t that,” explained the other. “I don’t mind
marching, if there’s going to be fighting at the end of it.
What I hate is this getting moved here and moved there,
with no good coming of it, as far as I can see, excepting sore
feet and damned short rations.”10
“Well, Jim Conklin says we’ll get a plenty of fighting this
time.”
“He’s right for once, I guess, though I can’t see how it
come. This time we’re in for a big battle, and we’ve got the
best end of it, certain sure. Gee rod! how we will thump
’em!”
He arose and began to pace to and fro excitedly. The thrill
of his enthusiasm made him walk with an elastic step. He
was sprightly, vigorous, fiery in his belief in success. He
looked into the future with clear, proud eye, and he swore
with the air of an old soldier.
The youth watched him for a moment in silence. When
he finally spoke his voice was as bitter as dregs.11 “Oh, you’re
going to do great things, I s’pose!”
The loud soldier blew a thoughtful cloud of smoke from
his pipe. “Oh, I don’t know,” he remarked with dignity; “I
don’t know. I s’pose I’ll do as well as the rest. I’m going to try
like thunder.” He evidently complimented himself upon the
modesty of this statement.
“How do you know you won’t run when the time comes?”
asked the youth.
“Run?” said the loud one; “run?—of course not!” He
laughed.
“Well,” continued the youth, “lots of good-a’-nough men
have thought they was going to do great things before the
fight, but when the time come they skedaddled.”12
“Oh, that’s true, I s’pose,” replied the other; “but I’m not
going to skedaddle. The man that bets on my running will
lose his money, that’s all.” He nodded confidently.
“Oh, shucks!” said the youth. “You ain’t the bravest man
in the world, are you?”
18 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
9. clip. Fight
10. rations. Food
11. dregs. The most undesirable part of something, especially a beverage
12. skedaddled. Fled in a panic
_ How does Wilson
feel about his own
position in the
upcoming battle?
What words would
you use to describe
Wilson?
“No, I ain’t,” exclaimed the loud soldier indignantly; “and
I didn’t say I was the bravest man in the world, neither. I said
I was going to do my share of fighting—that’s what I said.
And I am, too. Who are you, anyhow? You talk as if you
thought you was Napoleon Bonaparte.”13 He glared at the
youth for a moment, and then strode away.
The youth called in a savage voice after his comrade:
“Well, you needn’t git mad about it!” But the other continued
on his way and made no reply.
He felt alone in space when his injured comrade had disappeared.
His failure to discover any mite14 of resemblance
in their view points made him more miserable than before.
No one seemed to be wrestling with such a terrific personal
problem. He was a mental outcast.
He went slowly to his tent and stretched himself on a
blanket by the side of the snoring tall soldier. In the darkness
he saw visions of a thousand-tongued fear that would babble
at his back and cause him to flee, while others were going
coolly about their country’s business. He admitted that he
would not be able to cope with this monster. He felt that
every nerve in his body would be an ear to hear the voices,
while other men would remain stolid and deaf.
And as he sweated with the pain of these thoughts, he
could hear low, serene sentences. “I’ll bid five.” “Make it six.”
“Seven.” “Seven goes.”
He stared at the red, shivering reflection of a fire on the
white wall of his tent until, exhausted and ill from the
monotony of his suffering, he fell asleep.
CHAPTER 2 19
13. Napoleon Bonaparte. Napoleon Bonaparte (1769–1821) was one of France’s
greatest military strategists; he was emperor of France from 1804 to 1815.
14. mite. Very little bit
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
in • dig • nant • ly (in dig´nənt le￣) adv., in a righteously
angry, or displeased, manner
stol • id (stô´ləd) adj., having or expressing little or no sensibility;
unemotional
_ What makes the
youth miserable?
_ What are the
youth’s perceptions
about himself? About
the other soldiers?
Chapter 3
When another night came the columns, changed to purple
streaks, filed across two pontoon bridges.1 A glaring fire
wine-tinted the waters of the river. Its rays, shining upon the
moving masses of troops, brought forth here and there sudden
gleams of silver or gold. Upon the other shore a dark and
mysterious range of hills was curved against the sky. The
insect voices of the night sang solemnly.
After this crossing the youth assured himself that at any
moment they might be suddenly and fearfully assaulted
from the caves of the lowering2 woods. He kept his eyes
watchfully upon the darkness.
But his regiment went unmolested to a camping place,
and its soldiers slept the brave sleep of wearied men. In the
morning they were routed out with early energy, and hustled
along a narrow road that led deep into the forest.
It was during this rapid march that the regiment lost
many of the marks of a new command.
The men had begun to count the miles upon their fingers,
and they grew tired. “Sore feet an’ damned short rations,
that’s all,” said the loud soldier. There was perspiration and
grumblings. After a time they began to shed their knapsacks.
Some tossed them unconcernedly down; others hid them
carefully, asserting their plans to return for them at some
convenient time. Men extricated themselves from thick
shirts. Presently few carried anything but their necessary
clothing, blankets, haversacks, canteens, and arms and
ammunition.3 “You can now eat and shoot,” said the tall soldier
to the youth. “That’s all you want to do.”
There was sudden change from the ponderous infantry4of
theory to the light and speedy infantry of practice. The regiment,
relieved of a burden, received a new impetus. But
there was much loss of valuable knapsacks, and, on the
whole, very good shirts.
But the regiment was not yet veteranlike in appearance.
20 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
1. pontoon bridges. Temporary bridge made from portable floats
2. lowering. Be or become dark, gloomy, and threatening
3. canteens, and arms and ammunition. Canteens—flasks or containers for
carrying water; arms and ammunitions—guns and bullets
4. ponderous infantry. Ponderous—slow-moving; infantry—foot soldiers
_ In what ways do
the men become
more like veterans as
they march onward?
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
ex • tri • cate (ek´strə ka￣t) vt., free or remove from an entaglement
or difficulty
im • pe • tus (im´pə təs) n., driving force; stimulus
Veteran regiments in the army were likely to be very small
aggregations of men. Once, when the command had first
come to the field, some preambulating veterans, noting the
length of their column, had accosted them thus: “Hey,
fellers, what brigade is that?” And when the men had replied
that they formed a regiment and not a brigade,5 the older
soldiers had laughed, and said, “O Gawd!”
Also, there was too great a similarity in the hats. The hats
of a regiment should properly represent the history of headgear
for a period of years. And, moreover, there were no letters
of faded gold speaking from the colors. They were new
and beautiful, and the color bearer habitually oiled the pole.6
Presently the army again sat down to think. The odor of
the peaceful pines was in the men’s nostrils. The sound of
monotonous axe blows rang through the forest, and the
insects, nodding upon their perches, crooned like old
women. The youth returned to his theory of a blue demonstration.
One gray dawn, however, he was kicked in the leg by the
tall soldier, and then, before he was entirely awake, he found
himself running down a wood road in the midst of men who
were panting from the first effects of speed. His canteen
banged rhythmically upon his thigh, and his haversack
bobbed softly. His musket bounced a trifle from his shoulder
at each stride and made his cap feel uncertain upon his head.
He could hear the men whisper jerky sentences: “Say—
what’s all this—about?” “What th’ thunder—we—skedaddlin’
this way fer?” “Billie—keep off m’ feet. Yeh run—like a
cow.” And the loud soldier’s shrill voice could be heard:
“What th’ devil they in sich a hurry for?”
The youth thought the damp fog of early morning moved
from the rush of a great body of troops. From the distance
came a sudden spatter of firing.
He was bewildered. As he ran with his comrades he strenuously
tried to think, but all he knew was that if he fell down
CHAPTER 3 21
5. regiment and not a brigade. A brigade is a large military unit composed of
a number of smaller units called regiments. The veterans mistake the regiment
for a brigade because it is full of new recruits; the suggestion is that veteran regiments
were much smaller because so many soldiers had died.
6. color . . . pole. Person who carried the flag, known as the colors, of a military
unit; the color bearer polishes the wooden pole of the flag with oil
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
ag • gre • ga • tion (a gri ga￣´shən) n.,
group, body, or mass composed of many
distinct parts or individuals
per • am • bu • late (pər am´byo—_o la￣t)
vt., travel on foot; stroll
ac • cost (ə kôst´) vt., approach and speak
in a challenging or aggressive way
_ In what ways are
the body of soldiers
unlike a veteran
regiment?
_ How is the youth
awoken one
morning? What do
he and the other
soldiers do?
_ What does the
youth hear?
those coming behind would tread upon him. All his faculties
seemed to be needed to guide him over and past obstructions.
He felt carried along by a mob.
The sun spread disclosing rays, and, one by one, regiments
burst into view like armed men just born of the earth.
The youth perceived that the time had come. He was about
to be measured. For a moment he felt in the face of his great
trial like a babe, and the flesh over his heart seemed very
thin. He seized time to look about him calculatingly.
But he instantly saw that it would be impossible for him
to escape from the regiment. It inclosed him. And there were
iron laws of tradition and law on four sides. He was in a moving
box.
As he perceived this fact it occurred to him that he had
never wished to come to the war. He had not enlisted of his
free will. He had been dragged by the merciless government.
And now they were taking him out to be slaughtered.
The regiment slid down a bank and wallowed across a little
stream. The mournful current moved slowly on, and from
the water, shaded black, some white bubble eyes looked at
the men.
As they climbed the hill on the farther side artillery7 began
to boom. Here the youth forgot many things as he felt a sudden
impulse of curiosity. He scrambled up the bank with a
speed that could not be exceeded by a bloodthirsty man.
He expected a battle scene.
There were some little fields girted and squeezed by a forest.
Spread over the grass and in among the tree trunks, he
could see knots and waving lines of skirmishers8 who were
running hither and thither and firing at the landscape. A
dark battle line lay upon a sunstruck clearing that gleamed
orange color. A flag fluttered.
Other regiments floundered up the bank. The brigade was
formed in line of battle, and after a pause started slowly
through the woods in the rear of the receding skirmishers,
who were continually melting into the scene to appear again
farther on. They were always busy as bees, deeply absorbed
in their little combats.
22 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
7. artillery. Large guns worked by a crew of men
8. skirmishers. Persons who engage in fight, as in a war
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
dis • clos • ing (dis klo￣z´iŋ) adj., exposing
to view; revealing
wal • low (wô´lo￣) vi., roll oneself about in
an lazy or clumsy manner
gird (gərd) vt., encircle; surround
floun • der (floun´dər) vi., struggle to
move or obtain footing; thrash about
wildly
_ What does the
youth think when he
realizes that he will
soon have to fight?
Why might he think
this?
_ How does the
youth feel about his
decision to join the
army now?
_ What does the
youth expect to see?
What does he
actually see?
The youth tried to observe everything. He did not use care
to avoid trees and branches, and his forgotten feet were constantly
knocking against stones or getting entangled in
briers. He was aware that these battalions with their commotions
were woven red and startling into the gentle fabric
of softened greens and browns. It looked to be a wrong place
for a battle field.
The skirmishers in advance fascinated him. Their shots
into thickets and at distant and prominent trees spoke to
him of tragedies—hidden, mysterious, solemn.
Once the line encountered the body of a dead soldier. He
lay upon his back staring at the sky. He was dressed in an
awkward suit of yellowish brown. The youth could see that
the soles of his shoes had been worn to the thinness of writing
paper, and from a great rent in one the dead foot projected
piteously. And it was as if fate had betrayed the soldier.
In death it exposed to his enemies that poverty which in life
he had perhaps concealed from his friends.
The ranks opened covertly to avoid the corpse. The invulnerable
dead man forced a way for himself. The youth
looked keenly at the ashen face. The wind raised the tawny
beard. It moved as if a hand were stroking it. He vaguely
desired to walk around and around the body and stare; the
impulse of the living to try to read in dead eyes the answer
to the Question.
During the march the ardor which the youth had
acquired when out of view of the field rapidly faded to nothing.
His curiosity was quite easily satisfied. If an intense
scene had caught him with its wild swing as he came to the
top of the bank, he might have gone roaring on. This
advance upon Nature was too calm. He had opportunity to
reflect. He had time in which to wonder about himself and
to attempt to probe his sensations.
Absurd ideas took hold upon him. He thought that he did
not relish the landscape. It threatened him. A coldness swept
over his back, and it is true that his trousers felt to him that
they were no fit for his legs at all.
A house standing placidly in distant fields had to him an
ominous look. The shadows of the woods were formidable.
He was certain that in this vista there lurked fierce-eyed
hosts. The swift thought came to him that the generals did
CHAPTER 3 23 WWords
For
Everyday
Use
rent (rent) n., rip, tear
co • vert • ly (ko￣´vərt le￣) adv., not openly;
secretly
ash • en (a´shən) adj., resembling ashes
(as in color); deadly pale
for • mi • da • ble (fo￣r´mə də bəl) adj.,
causing fear, dread, or apprehension
_ What do the
soldiers encounter?
What do they note
about this person? In
what way has fate
betrayed him?
_ What does the
youth wish to do?
What question do
you think the youth
has in mind?
_ Why does the
setting make the
youth less excited
and eager to begin
fighting?
_ What is the youth
feeling about his
surroundings? his
commanding
officers?
not know what they were about. It was all a trap. Suddenly
those close forests would bristle with rifle barrels. Ironlike
brigades would appear in the rear. They were all going to be
sacrificed. The generals were stupids. The enemy would
presently swallow the whole command. He glared about
him, expecting to see the stealthy approach of his death.
He thought that he must break from the ranks and
harangue his comrades. They must not all be killed like pigs;
and he was sure it would come to pass unless they were
informed of these dangers. The generals were idiots to send
them marching into a regular pen. There was but one pair of
eyes in the corps. He would step forth and make a speech.
Shrill and passionate words came to his lips.
The line, broken into moving fragments by the ground,
went calmly on through fields and woods. The youth looked
at the men nearest him, and saw, for the most part, expressions
of deep interest, as if they were investigating something
that had fascinated them. One or two stepped with
overvaliant airs as if they were already plunged into war.
Others walked as upon thin ice. The greater part of the
untested men appeared quiet and absorbed. They were going
to look at war, the red animal—war, the blood-swollen god.
And they were deeply engrossed in this march.
As he looked the youth gripped his outcry at his throat.
He saw that even if the men were tottering with fear they
would laugh at his warning. They would jeer him, and, if
practicable, pelt him with missiles. Admitting that he might
be wrong, a frenzied declamation of the kind would turn
him into a worm.
He assumed, then, the demeanor of one who knows that
he is doomed alone to unwritten responsibilities. He lagged,
with tragic glances at the sky.
He was surprised presently by the young lieutenant of his
company, who began heartily to beat him with a sword, calling
out in a loud and insolent voice: “Come, young man, get
up into ranks there. No skulking’ll do here.” He mended his
pace with suitable haste. And he hated the lieutenant, who
had no appreciation of fine minds. He was a mere brute.
After a time the brigade was halted in the cathedral light
of a forest. The busy skirmishers were still popping. Through
the aisles of the wood could be seen the floating smoke from
24 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
ha • rangue (hə raŋ´) vi., make a ranting
speech
dec • la • ma • tion (de klə ma￣´shən) n.,
behavior toward others; outward manner
lag (lag) vi., stay or fall behind
in • so • lent (in´sə lənt) adj., insultingly
contemptuous in speech or conduct
_ What does the
youth feel an urge to
do?
_ Why doesn’t the
youth speak his mind
to the other soldiers?
_ How does the
youth feel about the
lieutenant?
their rifles. Sometimes it went up in little balls, white and
compact.
During this halt many men in the regiment began erecting
tiny hills in front of them. They used stones, sticks,
earth, and anything they thought might turn a bullet. Some
built comparatively large ones, while others seemed content
with little ones.
This procedure caused a discussion among the men. Some
wished to fight like duelists, believing it to be correct to
stand erect and be, from their feet to their foreheads, a mark.
They said they scorned the devices of the cautious. But the
others scoffed in reply, and pointed to the veterans on the
flanks who were digging at the ground like terriers.9 In a
short time there was quite a barricade along the regimental
fronts. Directly, however, they were ordered to withdraw
from that place.
This astounded the youth. He forgot his stewing10 over
the advance movement. “Well, then, what did they march us
out here for?” he demanded of the tall soldier. The latter
with calm faith began a heavy explanation, although he had
been compelled to leave a little protection of stones and dirt
to which he had devoted much care and skill.
When the regiment was aligned in another position each
man’s regard for his safety caused another line of small
intrenchments.11 They ate their noon meal behind a third
one. They were moved from this one also. They were
marched from place to place with apparent aimlessness.
The youth had been taught that a man became another
thing in a battle. He saw his salvation in such a change.
Hence this waiting was an ordeal to him. He was in a fever
of impatience. He considered that there was denoted a lack
of purpose on the part of the generals. He began to complain
to the tall soldier. “I can’t stand this much longer,” he cried.
“I don’t see what good it does to make us wear out our legs
for nothin’.” He wished to return to camp, knowing that this
affair was a blue demonstration; or else to go into a battle
CHAPTER 3 25
9. terriers. Type of small dog originally used by hunters to dig for small game
animals
10. stewing. Worrying
11. intrenchments. Entrenchments, long cuts in the ground used for protection
from bullets and the like in war
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
bar • ri • cade (bar´ə ka￣d) n., barrier thrown up across a
way or passage to check the advance of the enemy
de • note (di no￣t´) vt., make known
_ What do the
soldiers do once they
stop marching?
_ How do some of
the new recruits think
they should fight?
What type of soldiers
are digging the most
eagerly?
and discover that he had been a fool in his doubts, and was,
in truth, a man of traditional courage. The strain of present
circumstances he felt to be intolerable.
The philosophical tall soldier measured a sandwich of
cracker and pork and swallowed it in a nonchalant manner.
“Oh, I suppose we must go reconnoitering around the country
jest to keep ’em from getting too close, or to develop ’em,
or something.”
“Huh!” said the loud soldier.
“Well,” cried the youth, still fidgeting, “I’d rather do anything
’most than go tramping ’round the country all day
doing no good to nobody and jest tiring ourselves out.”
“So would I,” said the loud soldier. “It ain’t right. I tell you
if anybody with any sense was a-runnin’ this army it—”
“Oh, shut up!” roared the tall private. “You little fool. You
little damn’ cuss. You ain’t had that there coat and them
pants on for six months, and yet you talk as if—”
“Well, I wanta do some fighting anyway,” interrupted the
other. “I didn’t come here to walk. I could ’ave walked to
home—’round an’ ’round the barn, if I jest wanted to walk.”
The tall one, red-faced, swallowed another sandwich as if
taking poison in despair.
But gradually, as he chewed, his face became again quiet
and contented. He could not rage in fierce argument in the
presence of such sandwiches. During his meals he always
wore an air of blissful contemplation of the food he had
swallowed. His spirit seemed then to be communing with
the viands.
He accepted new environment and circumstance with
great coolness, eating from his haversack at every opportunity.
On the march he went along with the stride of a hunter,
objecting to neither gait nor distance. And he had not raised
his voice when he had been ordered away from three little
protective piles of earth and stone, each of which had been
an engineering feat worthy of being made sacred to the
name of his grandmother.
In the afternoon the regiment went out over the same
ground it had taken in the morning. The landscape then
ceased to threaten the youth. He had been close to it and
become familiar with it.
26 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
non • cha • lant (nôn shə lənt´) adj., having
an air of easy unconcern or indifference
re • con • noi • ter (re￣ kə nôi´tər) vi.,
engage in observation or inspection
vi • and (v_￣´ənd) n., item of food, especially
a choice or tasty dish
gait (ga￣t) n., manner of walking or moving
on foot
_ What do the
youth and the loud
soldier complain
about? What is the
tall soldier’s reaction
to their complaints?
_ What does the tall
soldier do to make
himself feel less
angry with his
companions?
_ In what ways does
the tall soldier react
to the various
difficulties the
soldiers have
experienced?
When, however, they began to pass into a new region, his
old fears of stupidity and incompetence reassailed him, but
this time he doggedly let them babble. He was occupied with
his problem, and in his desperation he concluded that the
stupidity did not greatly matter.
Once he thought he had concluded that it would be better
to get killed directly and end his troubles. Regarding
death thus out of the corner of his eye, he conceived it to be
nothing but rest, and he was filled with a momentary astonishment
that he should have made an extraordinary commotion
over the mere matter of getting killed. He would die;
he would go to some place where he would be understood.
It was useless to expect appreciation of his profound and fine
senses from such men as the lieutenant. He must look to the
grave for comprehension.
The skirmish fire increased to a long clattering sound.
With it was mingled far-away cheering. A battery spoke.12
Directly the youth could see the skirmishers running.
They were pursued by the sound of musketry fire. After a
time the hot, dangerous flashes of the rifles were visible.
Smoke clouds went slowly and insolently across the fields
like observant phantoms. The din became crescendo, like the
roar of an oncoming train.
A brigade ahead of them and on the right went into action
with a rending roar. It was as if it had exploded. And thereafter
it lay stretched in the distance behind a long gray wall,
that one was obliged to look twice at to make sure that it was
smoke.
The youth, forgetting his neat plan of getting killed, gazed
spell bound. His eyes grew wide and busy with the action of
the scene. His mouth was a little ways open.
Of a sudden he felt a heavy and sad hand laid upon his
shoulder. Awakening from his trance of observation he
turned and beheld the loud soldier.
“It’s my first and last battle, old boy,” said the latter, with
intense gloom. He was quite pale and his girlish lip was trembling.
“Eh?” murmured the youth in great astonishment.
CHAPTER 3 27
12. battery spoke. Group of large guns sounded
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
com • mo • tion (kə mo￣´shən) n., excitement or confusion
cre • scen • do (krə shen´do￣) n., a gradual increase, especially
in reference to music
_ What does the
youth decide would
be better than
experiencing his
current troubles?
_ What happens to
the youth’s “plan” as
soon as he sees and
hears the violence of
battle?
_ What does the
loud soldier tell the
youth? What does he
give to him?
“It’s my first and last battle, old boy,” continued the loud
soldier. “Something tells me—”
“What?”
“I’m a gone coon this first time and—and I w-want you to
take these here things—to—my—folks.” He ended in a quavering
sob of pity for himself. He handed the youth a little
packet done up in a yellow envelope.
“Why, what the devil—” began the youth again.
But the other gave him a glance as from the depths of a
tomb, and raised his limp hand in a prophetic manner and
turned away.
28 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
qua • ver • ing (kwa￣´və riŋ) adj., trembling
pro • phet • ic (prə fe´tik) adj., foretelling events; predictive
CHAPTERS 1–3 29
Respond to the Selection
What do you imagine war is like? If you were in Henry Fleming’s (the youth’s)
position, how would you feel about the battle about to take place?
Investigate, Inquire, and Imagine
Recall: GATHERING FACTS
1a. In Chapter 1, what dreams did
Henry Fleming (the youth) once
have about war? To what time
period did he see war as belonging
when he is awake? What was
Henry’s mother’s attitude toward the
idea of him enlisting?
2a. In Chapter 1, what rumor does
Jim Conklin (the tall soldier) spread?
What worries does Henry have about
battle? What is Jim’s opinion about
how the new regiment will do in
battle and whether he would run? In
Chapter 2, what is Wilson’s (the loud
soldier’s) opinion about how the
regiment will do? What is his opinion
about whether he would run?
3a. In Chapter 3, when the regiment
finally marches toward a battle,
what do Henry and the other
soldiers encounter for the first time,
and what do they notice about this
thing? What does Henry begin to
think about the army’s commanders?
What does Wilson (the loud
soldier) tell Henry once the regiment
sees the battle? What does Wilson
give to Henry?
Analyze: TAKING THINGS APART
4a. Identify Henry’s feelings about
war, death, and his own potential in
the upcoming battle. How have
Henry’s feelings about these things
changed from the beginning of
Chapter 1 to the end of Chapter 3?
Interpret: FINDING MEANING
1b. Why does Henry view war differently
depending on if he is dreaming
or awake? Given his dreams, why
does his mother’s reaction disappoint
him? Explain whether Henry is
justified in forming this opinion of
war based on his experiences so far.
2b. Why does Henry ask these two
soldiers these questions? What similarities
and differences between Jim
and Wilson do their answers reveal?
What type of person is Henry hoping
to discover and why? Explain what
the author means when he calls
Henry an “unknown quantity.”
3b. What do Henry’s thoughts about
the commanders reveal about his
feelings toward the battle? What do
Wilson’s words and actions at the
end of Chapter 3 reveal about his
earlier words about battle? How do
you think Wilson’s words at the end
of Chapter 3 make Henry feel?
Synthesize: BRINGING THINGS TOGETHER
4b. Based on what you have learned
about Henry so far, predict how
Henry will react in the upcoming
battle. Support your answer with
evidence you have gathered in your
response to question 4a.
➛
➛
➛
➛
Understanding Literature
Narrator and Point of View. A narrator is a person or character who tells a
story. Works of fiction almost always have a narrator, even if that person is just
an observer who does not take part in the action of the story. Point of view is
the vantage point from which a story is told. Stories can be told from the firstperson
point of view, in which the narrator uses words such as I and we, or from a
third-person point of view, in which the narrator uses words such as he, she, it,
and they. In some stories, the narrator’s point of view is limited. In such stories
the narrator can reveal his or her own private, internal thoughts or those of a
single character. In other stories, the narrator’s point of view is omniscient, or allknowing,
meaning that the narrator can reveal the private, internal thoughts of
any character. Who is the narrator of The Red Badge of Courage? From what
point of view is the story told? Whose private, internal thoughts are revealed?
Characterization. Characterization is the act of creating or describing a character.
Writers use three major techniques to create a character: direct description,
portrayal of the character’s behavior, and presenting the thoughts and emotions
of a character. In Chapters 1–3, what techniques does Crane use to create the
following characters? Summarize what you have learned about each character in
a sentence.
• Henry Fleming (the youth) • Wilson (the loud soldier)
• Jim Conklin (the tall soldier) • Mrs. Fleming (Henry’s mother)
Conflict and Protagonist. A conflict is a struggle between two people or things
in a literary work. A conflict can be external, meaning that it takes place between
a character and some outside force, such as another character, nature, or society.
A conflict can also be internal, meaning that it takes place within a person. A
protagonist is the main character in a story. The protagonist faces a struggle or
conflict. Who appears to be the protagonist in this story? What external conflict
does the protagonist experience? What internal conflict does the protagonist
experience?
30 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
Evaluate: MAKING JUDGMENTS
5a. The saying, “Hindsight is always
20/20,” means that if people were
given the opportunity to change
past actions, knowing what they
know now, they would often make
different, better choices. What do
you think of Henry’s mother’s advice
about war? Was her advice better or
worse than the advice ancient warriors’
parents gave them to “return
with your shield [alive], or on it
[dead]”?
Extend: CONNECTING IDEAS
5b. If you were Henry, what would
you say to Wilson before he turns
away at the end of Chapter 3? What
would you plan to do in the upcoming
battle? How might you prepare
yourself physically, mentally, or emotionally,
for what you plan to do?
➛
Chapter 4
The brigade was halted in the fringe of a grove. The men
crouched among the trees and pointed their restless guns out
at the fields. They tried to look beyond the smoke.
Out of this haze they could see running men. Some
shouted information and gestured as they hurried.
The men of the new regiment watched and listened
eagerly, while their tongues ran on in gossip of the battle.
They mouthed rumors that had flown like birds out of the
unknown.
“They say Perry has been driven in with big loss.”
“Yes, Carrott went t’ th’ hospital. He said he was sick. That
smart lieutenant is commanding ‘G’ Company. Th’ boys say
they won’t be under Carrott no more if they all have t’
desert. They allus knew he was a—”
“Hannises’ batt’ry is took.”
“It ain’t either. I saw Hannises’ batt’ry off on th’ left not
more’n fifteen minutes ago.”
“Well—”
“Th’ general, he ses he is goin’ t’ take th’ hull command
of th’ 304th when we go inteh action, an’ then he ses we’ll
do sech fightin’ as never another one reg’ment done.”
“They say we’re catchin’ it over on th’ left. They say th’
enemy driv’ our line inteh a devil of a swamp an’ took
Hannises’ batt’ry.”
“No sech thing. Hannises’ batt’ry was ’long here ’bout a
minute ago.”
“That young Hasbrouck, he makes a good off’cer. He ain’t
afraid ’a nothin’.”
“I met one of th’ 148th Maine boys an’ he ses his brigade
fit th’ hull rebel army fer four hours over on th’ turnpike
road an’ killed about five thousand of ’em. He ses one more
sech fight as that an’ th’ war ’ll be over.”
“Bill wasn’t scared either. No, sir! It wasn’t that. Bill ain’t
a-gittin’ scared easy. He was jest mad, that’s what he was.
When that feller trod on his hand, he up an’ sed that he was
willin’ t’ give his hand t’ his country, but he be dumbed if he
was goin’ t’ have every dumb bushwhacker1 in th’ kentry
CHAPTER 4 31 WWords
For
Everyday
Use
fringe (frinj) n., edge
grove (gro￣v) n., small wood without underbrush
1. bushwhacker. Person who takes part in an ambush
_ What do the men
do as they wait and
watch the battle?
_ What happened
to the man whose
hand was stepped
upon?
walkin’ ’round on it. So he went t’ th’ hospital disregardless
of th’ fight. Three fingers was crunched. Th’ dern doctor
wanted t’ amputate2 ’m, an’ Bill, he raised a heluva row, I
hear. He’s a funny feller.”
The din in front swelled to a tremendous chorus. The
youth and his fellows were frozen to silence. They could see
a flag that tossed in the smoke angrily. Near it were the
blurred and agitated forms of troops. There came a turbulent
stream of men across the fields. A battery changing position
at a frantic gallop scattered the stragglers right and left.
A shell3 screaming like a storm banshee4 went over the
huddled heads of the reserves.5 It landed in the grove, and
exploding redly flung the brown earth. There was a little
shower of pine needles.
Bullets began to whistle among the branches and nip at
the trees. Twigs and leaves came sailing down. It was as if a
thousand axes, wee6 and invisible, were being wielded. Many
of the men were constantly dodging and ducking their
heads.
The lieutenant of the youth’s company was shot in the
hand. He began to swear so wondrously that a nervous laugh
went along the regimental line. The officer’s profanity
sounded conventional. It relieved the tightened senses of the
new men. It was as if he had hit his fingers with a tack hammer
at home.
He held the wounded member carefully away from his
side so that the blood would not drip upon his trousers.
The captain of the company, tucking his sword under his
arm, produced a handkerchief and began to bind with it the
lieutenant’s wound. And they disputed as to how the binding
should be done.
The battle flag in the distance jerked about madly. It
seemed to be struggling to free itself from an agony. The billowing
smoke was filled with horizontal flashes.
32 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
2. amputate. Medicine was not as advanced as today during the Civil War;
unable to fight infections in torn or broken limbs, Civil War doctors often amputated
them.
3. shell. Projectile from a cannon that explodes
4. banshee. According to traditional Irish folklore, a female spirit who wails
and shrieks; supposedly when a banshee appeared, the death of someone present
was imminent.
5. reserves. Military force withheld from action for later use
6. wee. Very small, tiny WWords
For
Everyday
Use
tur • bu • lent (tər´byo—_o lənt) adj., causing
unrest, violence, or disturbance
nip (nip) vt., pinch, bite
con • ven • tion • al (kôn ven´shən əl)
adj., ordinary, commonplace
bil • low • ing (bi´lo￣ iŋ) adj., rising or
rolling in waves
_ What events put
an end to the gossip
and force the men to
become involved in
the battle?
_ What happens to
the lieutenant?
Men running swiftly emerged from it. They grew in numbers
until it was seen that the whole command was fleeing.
The flag suddenly sank down as if dying. Its motion as it fell
was a gesture of despair.
Wild yells came from behind the walls of smoke. A sketch
in gray and red dissolved into a moblike body of men who
galloped like wild horses.
The veteran regiments on the right and left of the 304th
immediately began to jeer. With the passionate song of the
bullets and the banshee shrieks of shells were mingled loud
catcalls and bits of facetious advice concerning places of
safety.
But the new regiment was breathless with horror. “Gawd!
Saunders’s got crushed!” whispered the man at the youth’s
elbow. They shrank back and crouched as if compelled to
await a flood.
The youth shot a swift glance along the blue ranks of the
regiment. The profiles were motionless, carven; and afterward
he remembered that the color sergeant was standing
with his legs apart, as if he expected to be pushed to the
ground.
The bellowing throng went whirling around the flank.7
Here and there were officers carried along on the stream like
exasperated chips. They were striking about them with their
swords and with their left fists, punching every head they
could reach. They cursed like highwaymen.8
A mounted officer displayed the furious anger of a spoiled
child. He raged with his head, his arms, and his legs.
Another, the commander of the brigade, was galloping
about bawling. His hat was gone and his clothes were awry.
He resembled a man who has come from bed to go to a fire.
The hoofs of his horse often threatened the heads of the running
men, but they scampered with singular fortune.9 In this
rush they were apparently all deaf and blind. They heeded
not the largest and longest of the oaths that were thrown at
them from all directions.
Frequently over this tumult could be heard the grim jokes
CHAPTER 4 33
7. flank. The right or left of a formation (of soldiers)
8. highwaymen. People who rob travelers along roads
9. singular fortune. Surprisingly good luck WWords
For
Everyday
Use
fa • ce • tious (fə se￣´shəs) adj., joking or
jesting often inappropriately
throng (thrôŋ) n., large number of
assembled persons
ex • as • per • at • ed (eg zas´pər a￣t əd)
adj., enraged, irritated, annoyed
bawl (bôl) vi., cry out at the top of one’s
voice
_ Who comes
running from the
smoke-filled battle?
_ What is the
veterans’ reaction to
the fleeing soldiers?
What is the new
troop’s reaction?
of the critical veterans; but the retreating men apparently
were not even conscious of the presence of an audience.
The battle reflection that shone for an instant in the faces
on the mad current made the youth feel that forceful hands
from heaven would not have been able to have held him in
place if he could have got intelligent control of his legs.
There was an appalling imprint upon these faces. The
struggle in the smoke had pictured an exaggeration of itself
on the bleached cheeks and in the eyes wild with one desire.
The sight of this stampede exerted a floodlike force that
seemed able to drag sticks and stones and men from the
ground. They of the reserves had to hold on. They grew pale
and firm, and red and quaking.
The youth achieved one little thought in the midst of this
chaos. The composite10 monster which had caused the other
troops to flee had not then appeared. He resolved to get a
view of it, and then, he thought he might very likely run better
than the best of them.
34 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
10. composite. Made up of distinct parts
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
ap • pall • ing (ə pôl´iŋ) adj., inspiring horror, dismay, or
disgust
_ What effect do the
fleeing soldiers have
on the youth’s state
of mind?
_ What does the
youth realize he
hasn’t even seen yet?
Chapter 5
There were moments of waiting. The youth thought of the
village street at home before the arrival of the circus parade1
on a day in the spring. He remembered how he had stood, a
small, thrillful boy, prepared to follow the dingy lady upon
the white horse, or the band in its faded chariot. He saw the
yellow road, the lines of expectant people, and the sober
houses. He particularly remembered an old fellow who used
to sit upon a cracker box in front of the store and feign to
despise such exhibition. A thousand details of color and
form surged in his mind. The old fellow upon the cracker
box appeared in middle prominence.
Some one cried, “Here they come!”
There was rustling and muttering among the men. They
displayed a feverish desire to have every possible cartridge2
ready to their hands. The boxes were pulled around into various
positions, and adjusted with great care. It was as if seven
hundred new bonnets were being tried on.
The tall soldier, having prepared his rifle, produced a red
handkerchief of some kind. He was engaged in knotting it
about his throat with exquisite attention to its position,
when the cry was repeated up and down the line in a muffled
roar of sound.
“Here they come! Here they come!” Gun locks clicked.
Across the smoke-infested fields came a brown swarm of
running men who were giving shrill yells. They came on,
stooping and swinging their rifles at all angles. A flag, tilted
forward, sped near the front.
As he caught sight of them the youth was momentarily
startled by a thought that perhaps his gun was not loaded.
He stood trying to rally his faltering intellect so that he
might recollect the moment when he had loaded, but he
could not.
A hatless general pulled his dripping horse to a stand near
the colonel of the 304th. He shook his fist in the other’s face.
CHAPTER 5 35
1. circus parade. In the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, traveling circuses
would advertise their arrival in town by parading through the main streets.
2. cartridge. Metal tube containing the charge for a firearm
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
din • gy (din´je￣) adj., dirty, shabby
so • ber (so￣´bər) adj., subdued in tone or
color
feign (fa￣n) vi., pretend
prom • i • nence (prô´mə nən(t)s) n.,
quality, state, or fact of being noticeable
or conspicuous
ral • ly (ra´le￣) vt., arouse for action; rouse
from depression or weakness
_ What do the
soldiers do as soon as
they know enemy
soldiers are
approaching?
_ What does the
youth see? What
thought occurs to
him?
“You’ve got to hold ’em back!” he shouted, savagely; “you’ve
got to hold ’em back!”
In his agitation the colonel began to stammer. “A-all rright,
General, all right, by Gawd! We-we’ll do our—we-we’ll
d-d-do—do our best, General.” The general made a passionate
gesture and galloped away. The colonel, perchance to
relieve his feelings, began to scold like a wet parrot. The
youth, turning swiftly to make sure that the rear was unmolested,
saw the commander regarding his men in a highly
resentful manner, as if he regretted above everything his
association with them.
The man at the youth’s elbow was mumbling, as if to himself:
“Oh, we’re in for it now! oh, we’re in for it now!”
The captain of the company had been pacing excitedly to
and fro in the rear. He coaxed in schoolmistress fashion, as
to a congregation of boys with primers. His talk was an endless
repetition. “Reserve your fire, boys—don’t shoot till I tell
you—save your fire—wait till they get close up—don’t be
damned fools—”
Perspiration streamed down the youth’s face, which was
soiled like that of a weeping urchin. He frequently, with a
nervous movement, wiped his eyes with his coat sleeve. His
mouth was still a little ways open.
He got the one glance at the foe-swarming field in front of
him, and instantly ceased to debate the question of his piece
being loaded. Before he was ready to begin—before he had
announced to himself that he was about to fight—he threw
the obedient, well-balanced rifle into position and fired a
first wild shot. Directly he was working at his weapon like an
automatic affair.
He suddenly lost concern for himself, and forgot to look
at a menacing fate. He became not a man but a member. He
felt that something of which he was a part—a regiment, an
army, a cause, or a country—was in a crisis. He was welded
into a common personality which was dominated by a single
desire. For some moments he could not flee no more
than a little finger can commit a revolution from a hand.
If he had thought the regiment was about to be annihilated
perhaps he could have amputated himself from it. But
its noise gave him assurance. The regiment was like a firework
that, once ignited, proceeds superior to circumstances
36 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
per • chance (pər chan(t)s´) adv., perhaps,
possibly
men • ac • ing (me´nəs iŋ) adj., threatening
harm
an • ni • hi • late (ə n_￣´ə la￣t) vt., cause to
cease to exist; kill
_ What attitude
does the colonel
seem to have toward
his men?
_ What does the
youth find himself
doing automatically?
_ How does the
youth feel once he
begins to fight in the
battle?
until its blazing vitality fades. It wheezed and banged with a
mighty power. He pictured the ground before it as strewn
with the discomfited.
There was a consciousness always of the presence of his
comrades about him. He felt the subtle battle brotherhood
more potent even than the cause for which they were fighting.
It was a mysterious fraternity born of the smoke and
danger of death.
He was at a task. He was like a carpenter who has made
many boxes, making still another box, only there was furious
haste in his movements. He, in his thoughts, was careering3
off in other places, even as the carpenter who as he
works whistles and thinks of his friend or his enemy, his
home or a saloon. And these jolted dreams were never perfect
to him afterward, but remained a mass of blurred shapes.
Presently he began to feel the effects of the war atmosphere—
a blistering sweat, a sensation that his eyeballs were
about to crack like hot stones. A burning roar filled his ears.
Following this came a red rage. He developed the acute
Chapter 5
There were moments of waiting. The youth thought of the
village street at home before the arrival of the circus parade1
on a day in the spring. He remembered how he had stood, a
small, thrillful boy, prepared to follow the dingy lady upon
the white horse, or the band in its faded chariot. He saw the
yellow road, the lines of expectant people, and the sober
houses. He particularly remembered an old fellow who used
to sit upon a cracker box in front of the store and feign to
despise such exhibition. A thousand details of color and
form surged in his mind. The old fellow upon the cracker
box appeared in middle prominence.
Some one cried, “Here they come!”
There was rustling and muttering among the men. They
displayed a feverish desire to have every possible cartridge2
ready to their hands. The boxes were pulled around into various
positions, and adjusted with great care. It was as if seven
hundred new bonnets were being tried on.
The tall soldier, having prepared his rifle, produced a red
handkerchief of some kind. He was engaged in knotting it
about his throat with exquisite attention to its position,
when the cry was repeated up and down the line in a muffled
roar of sound.
“Here they come! Here they come!” Gun locks clicked.
Across the smoke-infested fields came a brown swarm of
running men who were giving shrill yells. They came on,
stooping and swinging their rifles at all angles. A flag, tilted
forward, sped near the front.
As he caught sight of them the youth was momentarily
startled by a thought that perhaps his gun was not loaded.
He stood trying to rally his faltering intellect so that he
might recollect the moment when he had loaded, but he
could not.
A hatless general pulled his dripping horse to a stand near
the colonel of the 304th. He shook his fist in the other’s face.
CHAPTER 5 35
1. circus parade. In the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, traveling circuses
would advertise their arrival in town by parading through the main streets.
2. cartridge. Metal tube containing the charge for a firearm
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
din • gy (din´je￣) adj., dirty, shabby
so • ber (so￣´bər) adj., subdued in tone or
color
feign (fa￣n) vi., pretend
prom • i • nence (prô´mə nən(t)s) n.,
quality, state, or fact of being noticeable
or conspicuous
ral • ly (ra´le￣) vt., arouse for action; rouse
from depression or weakness
_ What do the
soldiers do as soon as
they know enemy
soldiers are
approaching?
_ What does the
youth see? What
thought occurs to
him?
“You’ve got to hold ’em back!” he shouted, savagely; “you’ve
got to hold ’em back!”
In his agitation the colonel began to stammer. “A-all rright,
General, all right, by Gawd! We-we’ll do our—we-we’ll
d-d-do—do our best, General.” The general made a passionate
gesture and galloped away. The colonel, perchance to
relieve his feelings, began to scold like a wet parrot. The
youth, turning swiftly to make sure that the rear was unmolested,
saw the commander regarding his men in a highly
resentful manner, as if he regretted above everything his
association with them.
The man at the youth’s elbow was mumbling, as if to himself:
“Oh, we’re in for it now! oh, we’re in for it now!”
The captain of the company had been pacing excitedly to
and fro in the rear. He coaxed in schoolmistress fashion, as
to a congregation of boys with primers. His talk was an endless
repetition. “Reserve your fire, boys—don’t shoot till I tell
you—save your fire—wait till they get close up—don’t be
damned fools—”
Perspiration streamed down the youth’s face, which was
soiled like that of a weeping urchin. He frequently, with a
nervous movement, wiped his eyes with his coat sleeve. His
mouth was still a little ways open.
He got the one glance at the foe-swarming field in front of
him, and instantly ceased to debate the question of his piece
being loaded. Before he was ready to begin—before he had
announced to himself that he was about to fight—he threw
the obedient, well-balanced rifle into position and fired a
first wild shot. Directly he was working at his weapon like an
automatic affair.
He suddenly lost concern for himself, and forgot to look
at a menacing fate. He became not a man but a member. He
felt that something of which he was a part—a regiment, an
army, a cause, or a country—was in a crisis. He was welded
into a common personality which was dominated by a single
desire. For some moments he could not flee no more
than a little finger can commit a revolution from a hand.
If he had thought the regiment was about to be annihilated
perhaps he could have amputated himself from it. But
its noise gave him assurance. The regiment was like a firework
that, once ignited, proceeds superior to circumstances
36 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
per • chance (pər chan(t)s´) adv., perhaps,
possibly
men • ac • ing (me´nəs iŋ) adj., threatening
harm
an • ni • hi • late (ə n_￣´ə la￣t) vt., cause to
cease to exist; kill
_ What attitude
does the colonel
seem to have toward
his men?
_ What does the
youth find himself
doing automatically?
_ How does the
youth feel once he
begins to fight in the
battle?
until its blazing vitality fades. It wheezed and banged with a
mighty power. He pictured the ground before it as strewn
with the discomfited.
There was a consciousness always of the presence of his
comrades about him. He felt the subtle battle brotherhood
more potent even than the cause for which they were fighting.
It was a mysterious fraternity born of the smoke and
danger of death.
He was at a task. He was like a carpenter who has made
many boxes, making still another box, only there was furious
haste in his movements. He, in his thoughts, was careering3
off in other places, even as the carpenter who as he
works whistles and thinks of his friend or his enemy, his
home or a saloon. And these jolted dreams were never perfect
to him afterward, but remained a mass of blurred shapes.
Presently he began to feel the effects of the war atmosphere—
a blistering sweat, a sensation that his eyeballs were
about to crack like hot stones. A burning roar filled his ears.
Following this came a red rage. He developed the acute

exasperation of a pestered animal, a well-meaning cow worried
by dogs. He had a mad feeling against his rifle, which
could only be used against one life at a time. He wished to
rush forward and strangle with his fingers. He craved a power
that would enable him to make a world-sweeping gesture
and brush all back. His impotency appeared to him, and
made his rage into that of a driven beast.
Buried in the smoke of many rifles his anger was directed
not so much against the men whom he knew were rushing
toward him as against the swirling battle phantoms which
were choking him, stuffing their smoke robes down his
parched throat. He fought frantically for respite for his
senses, for air, as a babe being smothered attacks the deadly
blankets.
There was a blare of heated rage mingled with a certain
expression of intentness on all faces. Many of the men were
making low-toned noises with their mouths, and these subdued
cheers, snarls, imprecations, prayers, made a wild, barbaric
song that went as an undercurrent of sound, strange
and chantlike with the resounding chords of the war march.
CHAPTER 5 37
3. careering. Going at top speed, in a haphazard manner
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
dis • com • fit • ed (dis kum´fit əd), n.,
the defeated in battle
parched (pärcht) adj., deprived of natural
moisture; thirsty
re • spite (res´pət) n., interval of rest or
relief
im • pre • ca • tion (im pri ka￣´shən) n.,
curse
_ What does the
youth find his mind
doing as he keeps
reloading his gun
and shooting at the
enemy?
_ In what way does
the youth’s state of
mind change after a
while? What does he
wish he could do?
_ With whom or
what is the youth
angry?
The man at the youth’s elbow was babbling. In it there was
something soft and tender like the monologue of a babe. The
tall soldier was swearing in a loud voice. From his lips came
a black procession of curious oaths. Of a sudden another
broke out in a querulous way like a man who has mislaid his
hat. “Well, why don’t they support us? Why don’t they send
supports? Do they think—”
The youth in his battle sleep heard this as one who dozes
hears.
There was a singular absence of heroic poses. The men
bending and surging in their haste and rage were in every
impossible attitude. The steel ramrods4 clanked and clanged
with incessant din as the men pounded them furiously into
the hot rifle barrels. The flaps of the cartridge boxes were all
unfastened, and bobbed idiotically with each movement.
The rifles, once loaded, were jerked to the shoulder and fired
without apparent aim into the smoke or at one of the blurred
and shifting forms which upon the field before the regiment
had been growing larger and larger like puppets under a
magician’s hand.
The officers, at their intervals, rearward, neglected to
stand in picturesque attitudes. They were bobbing to and fro
roaring directions and encouragements. The dimensions of
their howls were extraordinary. They expended their lungs
with prodigal wills. And often they nearly stood upon their
heads in their anxiety to observe the enemy on the other
side of the tumbling smoke.
The lieutenant of the youth’s company had encountered
a soldier who had fled screaming at the first volley of his
comrades. Behind the lines these two were acting a little isolated
scene. The man was blubbering and staring with sheeplike
eyes at the lieutenant, who had seized him by the collar
and was pommeling5 him. He drove him back into the ranks
with many blows. The soldier went mechanically, dully, with
his animal-like eyes upon the officer. Perhaps there was to
him a divinity expressed in the voice of the other—stern,
hard, with no reflection of fear in it. He tried to reload his
38 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
4. Ramrods. Rods used to push the charge into the muzzle of a gun. Most guns
in this period had to be reloaded after each shot.
5. pommeling. Pummeling, or beating WWords
For
Everyday
Use
mono • logue (mon´ə lo_) n., long speech
monopolizing conversation
quer • u • lous (kwer´yo—_o ləs) adj., habitually
complaining; whining
pic • tur • esque (pik chə resk´) adj.,
resembling a picture; charming or quaint
in appearance
prod • i • gal (prə´di gəl) adj., recklessly
extravagant
_ What don’t the
men look like as they
shoot?
_ What has one
soldier done already?
Who confronts this
soldier?
gun, but his shaking hands prevented. The lieutenant was
obliged to assist him.
The men dropped here and there like bundles. The captain
of the youth’s company had been killed in an early part
of the action. His body lay stretched out in the position of a
tired man resting, but upon his face there was an astonished
and sorrowful look, as if he thought some friend had done
him an ill turn. The babbling man was grazed by a shot that
made the blood stream widely down his face. He clapped
both hands to his head. “Oh!” he said, and ran. Another
grunted suddenly as if he had been struck by a club in the
stomach. He sat down and gazed ruefully. In his eyes there
was mute, indefinite reproach. Farther up the line a man,
standing behind a tree, had had his knee joint splintered by
a ball.6 Immediately he had dropped his rifle and gripped the
tree with both arms. And there he remained, clinging desperately
and crying for assistance that he might withdraw his
hold upon the tree.
At last an exultant yell went along the quivering line. The
firing dwindled from an uproar to a last vindictive popping.
As the smoke slowly eddied away, the youth saw that the
charge had been repulsed. The enemy were scattered into
reluctant groups. He saw a man climb to the top of the fence,
straddle the rail, and fire a parting shot. The waves had
receded, leaving bits of dark debris upon the ground.
Some in the regiment began to whoop frenziedly. Many
were silent. Apparently they were trying to contemplate
themselves.
After the fever had left his veins, the youth thought that
at last he was going to suffocate. He became aware of the foul
atmosphere in which he had been struggling. He was grimy
and dripping like a laborer in a foundry.7 He grasped his canteen
and took a long swallow of the warmed water.
A sentence with variations went up and down the line.
“Well, we ’ve helt ’em back. We ’ve helt ’em back; derned if
we haven’t.” The men said it blissfully, leering at each other
with dirty smiles.
CHAPTER 5 39
6. ball. Musket ball, or round pellet from a heavy shoulder firearm used by
foot soldiers
7. foundry. Place where hot metal is molded, known for being extremely hot WWords
For
Everyday
Use
rue • ful • ly (ro—_o´fə le￣) adv., mournfully,
regretfully
re • proach (ri pro￣ch´) n., expression of
blame or disapproval
ex • ul • tant (eg zul´tənt) adj., filled with
or expressing great joy or triumph
ed • dy (e´de￣) vi., move in a circle, like a
whirlpool
leer (le￣r) vi., glance at sidelong
_ What is
happening to some
of the men in the
youth’s regiment?
What different
emotions does the
youth see these
people express?
_ What has the
youth’s regiment
managed to do?
The youth turned to look behind him and off to the right
and off to the left. He experienced the joy of a man who at
last finds leisure in which to look about him.
Under foot there were a few ghastly forms motionless.
They lay twisted in fantastic contortions. Arms were bent
and heads were turned in incredible ways. It seemed that the
dead men must have fallen from some great height to get
into such positions. They looked to be dumped out upon the
ground from the sky.
From a position in the rear of the grove a battery was
throwing shells over it. The flash of the guns startled the
youth at first. He thought they were aimed directly at him.
Through the trees he watched the black figures of the gunners
as they worked swiftly and intently. Their labor seemed
a complicated thing. He wondered how they could remember
its formula in the midst of confusion.
The guns squatted in a row like savage chiefs. They argued
with abrupt violence. It was a grim pow-wow.8 Their busy
servants ran hither and thither.
A small procession of wounded men were going drearily
toward the rear. It was a flow of blood from the torn body of
the brigade.
To the right and to the left were the dark lines of other
troops. Far in front he thought he could see lighter masses
protruding in points from the forest. They were suggestive of
unnumbered thousands.
Once he saw a tiny battery go dashing along the line of
the horizon. The tiny riders were beating the tiny horses.
From a sloping hill came the sound of cheerings and
clashes. Smoke welled slowly through the leaves.
Batteries were speaking with thunderous oratorical effort.
Here and there were flags, the red in the stripes dominating.
They splashed bits of warm color upon the dark lines of
troops.
The youth felt the old thrill at the sight of the emblems.
They were like beautiful birds strangely undaunted in a
storm.
As he listened to the din from the hillside, to a deep pul-
40 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
8. pow-wow. Meeting for discussion
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
con • tor • tion (kən tôr´shən) n.,
twisted, strained shape
well (wel) vi., rise like a flood of liquid
or • a • tor • i • cal (ôr ə tôr´i kəl) adj.,
relating to, or characteristic of, a public
speaker or speeches
un • daunt • ed (ən dôn´təd) adj., courageous
and determined in the face of danger
or difficulty
_ What is unusual
about the way the
dead lie?
_ What does the
youth think the
heavy guns are like?
What does he think
the men who work
them are like?
_ How does the
youth feel about his
regiment’s flag? To
what does he
compare them?
sating thunder that came from afar to the left, and to the
lesser clamors which came from many directions, it occurred
to him that they were fighting, too, over there, and over
there, and over there. Heretofore he had supposed that all
the battle was directly under his nose.
As he gazed around him the youth felt a flash of astonishment
at the blue, pure sky and the sun gleamings on the
trees and fields. It was surprising that Nature had gone tranquilly
on with her golden process in the midst of so much
devilment.
CHAPTER 5 41
_ What does the
youth realize? What
had he thought
about the battle?
Chapter 6
The youth awakened slowly. He came gradually back to a
position from which he could regard himself. For moments
he had been scrutinizing his person in a dazed way as if he
had never before seen himself. Then he picked up his cap
from the ground. He wriggled in his jacket to make a more
comfortable fit, and kneeling relaced his shoe. He thoughtfully
mopped his reeking1 features.
So it was all over at last! The supreme trial had been
passed. The red, formidable difficulties of war had been vanquished.
He went into an ecstasy of self-satisfaction. He had the
most delightful sensations of his life. Standing as if apart
from himself, he viewed that last scene. He perceived that
the man who had fought thus was magnificent.
He felt that he was a fine fellow. He saw himself even with
those ideals which he had considered as far beyond him. He
smiled in deep gratification.
Upon his fellows he beamed tenderness and good will.
“Gee! ain’t it, hot, hey?” he said affably to a man who was
polishing his streaming face with his coat sleeves.
“You bet!” said the other, grinning sociably. “I never seen
sech dumb hotness.” He sprawled out luxuriously on the
ground. “Gee, yes! An’ I hope we don’t have no more fightin’
till a week from Monday.”
There were some handshakings and deep speeches with
men whose features were familiar, but with whom the youth
now felt the bonds of tied hearts. He helped a cursing comrade
to bind up a wound of the shin.
But, of a sudden, cries of amazement broke out along the
ranks of the new regiment. “Here they come ag’in! Here they
come ag’in!” The man who had sprawled upon the ground
started up and said, “Gosh!”
The youth turned quick eyes upon the field. He discerned
forms begin to swell in masses out of a distant wood. He
again saw the tilted flag speeding forward.
The shells, which had ceased to trouble the regiment for a
42 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
1. reeking. Steaming, sweating
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
scru • ti • nize (skro—_o´t_n ￣_ z) vt., examine closely and minutely
af • fa • bly (a´fə ble￣) adv., pleasantly; in a friendly manner
dis • cern (di sərn´) vt., detect with the eyes
_ What does the
youth think is over?
What does he think
he has vanquished?
_ How does the
youth feel about
himself?
_ What happens
that amazes the new
soldiers?
time, came swirling again, and exploded in the grass or
among the leaves of the trees. They looked to be strange war
flowers bursting into fierce bloom.
The men groaned. The luster faded from their eyes. Their
smudged countenances now expressed a profound dejection.
They moved their stiffened bodies slowly, and watched in
sullen mood the frantic approach of the enemy. The slaves
toiling in the temple of this god began to feel rebellion at his
harsh tasks.
They fretted and complained each to each. “Oh, say, this
is too much of a good thing! Why can’t somebody send us
supports?”
“We ain’t never goin’ to stand this second banging. I didn’t
come here to fight the hull damn’ rebel army.”
There was one who raised a doleful cry. “I wish Bill
Smithers had trod on my hand, insteader me treddin’ on
his’n.” The sore joints of the regiment creaked as it painfully
floundered into position to repulse.
The youth stared. Surely, he thought, this impossible
thing was not about to happen. He waited as if he expected
the enemy to suddenly stop, apologize, and retire bowing. It
was all a mistake.
But the firing began somewhere on the regimental line
and ripped along in both directions. The level sheets of flame
developed great clouds of smoke that tumbled and tossed in
the mild wind near the ground for a moment, and then
rolled through the ranks2 as through a grate. The clouds were
tinged an earthlike yellow in the sunrays and in the shadow
were a sorry blue. The flag was sometimes eaten and lost in
this mass of vapor, but more often it projected, sun-touched,
resplendent.
Into the youth’s eyes there came a look that one can see
in the orbs of a jaded horse. His neck was quivering with
nervous weakness and the muscles of his arms felt numb and
bloodless. His hands, too, seemed large and awkward as if he
was wearing invisible mittens. And there was a great uncertainty
about his knee joints.
The words that comrades had uttered previous to the firing
began to recur to him. “Oh, say, this is too much of a
CHAPTER 6 43
2. ranks. Line of soldiers arranged side by side in close order
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
lus • ter (lus´tər) n., glow of reflected light
sul • len (sə´lən) adj., gloomily or resentfully
silent or repressed
dole • ful (do￣l´fəl) adj., full of grief
re • splen • dent (ri splen´dənt) adj., shining
brilliantly; characterized by a glowing splendor
jaded (ja￣d´əd) adj., fatigued by overwork;
exhausted
_ To what are the
exploding shells
compared?
_ What attitude do
the men have toward
fighting again?
_ What does one
man wish? Why do
you think the man
who stepped on Bill
Smithers’s hand
wishes this?
_ How is the youth
beginning to feel
physically?
good thing! What do they take us for—why don’t they send
supports? I didn’t come here to fight the hull damned rebel
army.”
He began to exaggerate the endurance, the skill, and the
valor of those who were coming. Himself reeling from
exhaustion, he was astonished beyond measure at such persistency.
They must be machines of steel. It was very gloomy
struggling against such affairs, wound up perhaps to fight
until sundown.
He slowly lifted his rifle and catching a glimpse of the
thickspread field he blazed at a cantering3 cluster. He stopped
then and began to peer as best he could through the smoke.
He caught changing views of the ground covered with men
who were all running like pursued imps, and yelling.
To the youth it was an onslaught of redoubtable dragons.
He became like the man who lost his legs at the approach of
the red and green monster. He waited in a sort of a horrified,
listening attitude. He seemed to shut his eyes and wait to be
gobbled.
A man near him who up to this time had been working
feverishly at his rifle suddenly stopped and ran with howls.
A lad whose face had borne an expression of exalted courage,
the majesty of he who dares give his life, was, at an instant,
smitten abject. He blanched like one who has come to the
edge of a cliff at midnight and is suddenly made aware.
There was a revelation. He, too, threw down his gun and
fled. There was no shame in his face. He ran like a rabbit.
Others began to scamper away through the smoke. The
youth turned his head, shaken from his trance by this movement
as if the regiment was leaving him behind. He saw the
few fleeting forms.
He yelled then with fright and swung about. For a
moment, in the great clamor, he was like a proverbial4
chicken. He lost the direction of safety. Destruction threatened
him from all points.
Directly he began to speed toward the rear in great leaps.
His rifle and cap were gone. His unbuttoned coat bulged in
the wind. The flap of his cartridge box bobbed wildly, and
44 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
3. cantering. Running
4. proverbial. Commonly spoken of
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
reel (re￣l) vt., walk or move unsteadily
on • slaught (on´slot) n., especially fierce
attack
re • doubt • able (ri dau´tə bəl) adj.,
causing fear or alarm
ab • ject (ab´jekt) adj., cast down in spirit
blanch (blanch) vi., become white or pale
_ What does the
youth think of the
enemy?
_ What does the
youth see? How does
he feel about what
he sees?
_ What do men who
previously fought
with an air of
confidence begin to
do?
_ What does the
youth do?
his canteen, by its slender cords, swung out behind. On his
face was all the horror of those things which he imagined.
The lieutenant sprang forward bawling. The youth saw his
features wrathfully red, and saw him make a dab5 with his
sword. His one thought of the incident was that the lieutenant
was a peculiar creature to feel interested in such matters
upon this occasion.
He ran like a blind man. Two or three times he fell down.
Once he knocked his shoulder so heavily against a tree that
he went headlong.
Since he had turned his back upon the fight his fears had
been wondrously magnified. Death about to thrust him
between the shoulder blades was far more dreadful than
death about to smite him between the eyes. When he
thought of it later, he conceived the impression that it is better
to view the appalling than to be merely within hearing.
The noises of the battle were like stones; he believed himself
liable to be crushed.
As he ran he mingled with others. He dimly saw men on
his right and on his left, and he heard footsteps behind him.
He thought that all the regiment was fleeing, pursued by
these ominous crashes.
In his flight the sound of these following footsteps gave
him his one meager relief. He felt vaguely that death must
make a first choice of the men who were nearest; the initial
morsel for the dragons would be then those who were following
him. So he displayed the zeal of an insane sprinter in
his purpose to keep them in the rear. There was a race.
As he, leading, went across a little field, he found himself
in a region of shells. They hurtled over his head with long
wild screams. As he listened he imagined them to have rows
of cruel teeth that grinned at him. Once one lit before him
and the livid lightning of the explosion effectually barred
the way in his chosen direction. He groveled on the ground
and then springing up went careering off through some
bushes.
He experienced a thrill of amazement when he came
within view of a battery in action. The men there seemed to
be in conventional moods, altogether unaware of the
CHAPTER 6 45
5. dab. Sudden blow or thrust
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
head • long (hed lôŋ´) adv., headfirst
mor • sel (môr´səl) n., small piece of food; bite
_ Does running
from the battle make
the youth more or
less afraid? Why?
_ Is the youth alone
in running? What
thought comforts
him?
impending annihilation. The battery was disputing with a
distant antagonist and the gunners were wrapped in admiration
of their shooting. They were continually bending in
coaxing postures over the guns. They seemed to be patting
them on the back and encouraging them with words. The
guns, stolid and undaunted, spoke with dogged valor.
The precise gunners were coolly enthusiastic. They lifted
their eyes every chance to the smoke-wreathed hillock from
whence the hostile battery addressed them. The youth pitied
them as he ran. Methodical idiots! Machine-like fools! The
refined joy of planting shells in the midst of the other battery’s
formation would appear a little thing when the
infantry came swooping out of the woods.
The face of a youthful rider, who was jerking his frantic
horse with an abandon of temper he might display in a
placid barnyard, was impressed deeply upon his mind. He
knew that he looked upon a man who would presently be
dead.
Too, he felt a pity for the guns, standing, six good comrades,
in a bold row.
He saw a brigade going to the relief of its pestered fellows.
He scrambled upon a wee hill and watched it sweeping
finely, keeping formation in difficult places. The blue of the
line was crusted with steel color, and the brilliant flags projected.
Officers were shouting.
This sight also filled him with wonder. The brigade was
hurrying briskly to be gulped into the infernal mouths of the
war god. What manner of men were they, anyhow? Ah, it
was some wondrous breed! Or else they didn’t comprehend—
the fools.
A furious order caused commotion in the artillery. An
officer on a bounding horse made maniacal motions with his
arms. The teams went swinging up from the rear, the guns
were whirled about, and the battery scampered away. The
cannon with their noses poked slantingly at the ground
grunted and grumbled like stout men, brave but with objections
to hurry.
The youth went on, moderating his pace since he had left
the place of noises.
Later he came upon a general of division seated upon a
horse that pricked its ears in an interested way at the battle.
46 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
an • tag • o • nist (an ta´gə nist) n., one
that contends with or opposes another
stol • id (stô´ləd) adj., unemotional
me • thod • i • cal (mə thə´di kəl) adj.,
habitually proceeding according to order
in • fer • nal (in fər´nəl) adj., of or relating
to a nether world of the dead
ma • ni • a • cal (mə n_￣´ə kəl) adj., characterized
by uncontrollable excitement or
frenzy
_ What does the
youth feel for the
calm men who work
the heavy artillery?
What does he think
will happen to these
men?
_ What does the
youth think will
happen to a young
horseman he sees?
_ What does the
youth think of the
brigade going to the
relief of fellow
soldiers?
_ Whom does the
youth come across?
There was a great gleaming of yellow and patent leather
about the saddle and bridle. The quiet man astride looked
mouse-colored upon such a splendid charger.6
A jingling staff was galloping hither and thither.
Sometimes the general was surrounded by horsemen and at
other times he was quite alone. He looked to be much
harassed. He had the appearance of a business man whose
market is swinging up and down.
The youth went slinking around this spot. He went as
near as he dared trying to overhear words. Perhaps the general,
unable to comprehend chaos, might call upon him for
information. And he could tell him. He knew all concerning
it. Of a surety the force was in a fix, and any fool could see
that if they did not retreat while they had opportunity—
why—
He felt that he would like to thrash the general, or at least
approach and tell him in plain words exactly what he
thought him to be. It was criminal to stay calmly in one spot
and make no effort to stay7 destruction. He loitered in a fever
of eagerness for the division commander to apply to him.
As he warily moved about, he heard the general call out
irritably: “Tompkins, go over an’ see Taylor, an’ tell him not
t’ be in such an all-fired hurry; tell him t’ halt his brigade in
th’ edge of th’ woods; tell him t’ detach a reg’ment—say I
think th’ center ’ll break if we don’t help it out some; tell him
t’ hurry up.”
A slim youth on a fine chestnut horse caught these swift
words from the mouth of his superior. He made his horse
bound into a gallop almost from a walk in his haste to go
upon his mission. There was a cloud of dust.
A moment later the youth saw the general bounce excitedly
in his saddle.
“Yes, by heavens, they have!” The officer leaned forward.
His face was aflame with excitement. “Yes, by heavens,
they’ve held ’em! They ’ve held ’em!”
He began to blithely roar at his staff: “We ’ll wallop ’em
now. We ’ll wallop ’em now. We ’ve got ’em sure.” He turned
suddenly upon an aide: “Here—you—Jones—quick—ride
CHAPTER 6 47
6. charger. Battle horse
7. stay. Stop or delay the proceeding of
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
ha • rass (hə ras´) vt., annoy persistently
slink (sliŋk) vi., move stealthily or furtively (as in fear or shame)
loi • ter (lôi´tər) vi., remain in an area for no obvious reason
_ To what does the
youth compare the
general’s
appearance?
_ What does the
youth hope he will
have a chance to tell
the general?
_ What good news
does the general
learn? How does he
feel about the way
the battle is
progressing?
after Tompkins—see Taylor—tell him t’ go in—everlastingly—
like blazes—anything.”
As another officer sped his horse after the first messenger,
the general beamed upon the earth like a sun. In his eyes was
a desire to chant a paean. He kept repeating, “They ’ve held
’em, by heavens!”
His excitement made his horse plunge, and he merrily
kicked and swore at it. He held a little carnival of joy on
horseback.
48 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
pae • an (pe￣´ən) n., joyous song or hymn of praise, tribute,
thanksgiving, or triumph
Chapter 7
The youth cringed as if discovered in a crime. By heavens,
they had won after all! The imbecile line had remained and
become victors. He could hear cheering.
He lifted himself upon his toes and looked in the direction
of the fight. A yellow fog lay wallowing on the treetops.
From beneath it came the clatter of musketry.1 Hoarse cries
told of an advance.
He turned away amazed and angry. He felt that he had
been wronged.
He had fled, he told himself, because annihilation
approached. He had done a good part in saving himself, who
was a little piece of the army. He had considered the time, he
said, to be one in which it was the duty of every little piece
to rescue itself if possible. Later the officers could fit the little
pieces together again, and make a battle front. If none of
the little pieces were wise enough to save themselves from
the flurry of death at such a time, why, then, where would
be the army? It was all plain that he had proceeded according
to very correct and commendable rules. His actions had
been sagacious things. They had been full of strategy. They
were the work of a master’s legs.
Thoughts of his comrades came to him. The brittle blue
line had withstood the blows and won. He grew bitter over
it. It seemed that the blind ignorance and stupidity of those
little pieces had betrayed him. He had been overturned and
crushed by their lack of sense in holding the position, when
intelligent deliberation would have convinced them that it
was impossible. He, the enlightened man who looks afar in
the dark, had fled because of his superior perceptions and
knowledge. He felt a great anger against his comrades. He
knew it could be proved that they had been fools.
He wondered what they would remark when later he
appeared in camp. His mind heard howls of derision. Their
density would not enable them to understand his sharper
point of view.
CHAPTER 7 49
1. musketry. Musket fire; noise from heavy, shoulder-borne guns carried by
foot soldiers
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
sa • ga • cious (sə ga￣´shəs) adj., of keen
and farsighted penetration and judgment
de • lib • er • a • tion (di li´bə ra￣´shən) n.,
consideration, thought
en • light • ened (en l_￣´tend) adj., freed
from ignorance and misinformation
de • ri • sion (di ri´zhən) n., the use of
ridicule or scorn to show contempt
_ How does the
youth feel about
himself when he
realizes his side has
won?
_ In what way does
the youth justify his
decision to run?
_ According to the
youth, what quality
caused the other men
to stay? What caused
him to run?
He began to pity himself acutely. He was ill used. He was
trodden beneath the feet of an iron injustice. He had proceeded
with wisdom and from the most righteous motives
under heaven’s blue only to be frustrated by hateful circumstances.
A dull, animal-like rebellion against his fellows, war in the
abstract, and fate grew within him. He shambled along with
bowed head, his brain in a tumult of agony and despair.
When he looked loweringly up, quivering at each sound, his
eyes had the expression of those of a criminal who thinks his
guilt little and his punishment great, and knows that he can
find no words.
He went from the fields into a thick woods, as if resolved
to bury himself. He wished to get out of hearing of the crackling
shots which were to him like voices.
The ground was cluttered with vines and bushes, and the
trees grew close and spread out like bouquets. He was obliged
to force his way with much noise. The creepers, catching
against his legs, cried out harshly as their sprays2 were torn
from the barks of trees. The swishing saplings3 tried to make
known his presence to the world. He could not conciliate the
forest. As he made his way, it was always calling out protestations.
When he separated embraces of trees and vines the
disturbed foliages waved their arms and turned their face
leaves toward him. He dreaded lest these noisy motions and
cries should bring men to look at him. So he went far, seeking
dark and intricate places.
After a time the sound of musketry grew faint and the cannon
boomed in the distance. The sun, suddenly apparent,
blazed among the trees. The insects were making rhythmical
noises. They seemed to be grinding their teeth in unison. A
woodpecker stuck his impudent head around the side of a
tree. A bird flew on lighthearted wing.
Off was the rumble of death. It seemed now that Nature
had no ears.
This landscape gave him assurance. A fair field holding
life. It was the religion of peace. It would die if its timid eyes
50 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
2. sprays. Flowering branches or shoots
3. saplings. Very young trees
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
low • er • ing • ly (lou´ər iŋ le￣) adv., in a
dark and threatening manner
con • cil • i • ate (kən si´le￣ a￣t) vt., gain
(as goodwill) by pleasing acts
fo • liage (fo￣´le￣ ij) n., cluster of leaves,
flowers, and branches
_ Where does the
youth go?
_ What type of
place does the youth
find?
_ What does the
youth think would
happen to this place
if it witnessed the
bloodshed of the
battlefield?
were compelled to see blood. He conceived Nature to be a
woman with a deep aversion to tragedy.
He threw a pine cone at a jovial squirrel, and he ran with
chattering fear. High in a treetop he stopped, and, poking his
head cautiously from behind a branch, looked down with an
air of trepidation.
The youth felt triumphant at this exhibition. There was
the law, he said. Nature had given him a sign. The squirrel,
immediately upon recognizing danger, had taken to his legs
without ado.4 He did not stand stolidly baring his furry belly
to the missile, and die with an upward glance at the sympathetic
heavens. On the contrary, he had fled as fast as his legs
could carry him; and he was but an ordinary squirrel, too—
doubtless no philosopher of his race. The youth wended,5
feeling that Nature was of his mind. She reenforced his argument
with proofs that lived where the sun shone.
Once he found himself almost into a swamp. He was
obliged to walk upon bog tufts6 and watch his feet to keep
from the oily mire. Pausing at one time to look about him he
saw, out at some black water, a small animal pounce in and
emerge directly with a gleaming fish.
The youth went again into the deep thickets. The brushed
branches made a noise that drowned the sounds of cannon.
He walked on, going from obscurity into promises of a
greater obscurity.
At length he reached a place where the high, arching
boughs made a chapel. He softly pushed the green doors
aside and entered. Pine needles were a gentle brown carpet.
There was a religious half light.
Near the threshold he stopped, horror-stricken at the sight
of a thing.
He was being looked at by a dead man who was seated
with his back against a columnlike tree. The corpse was
dressed in a uniform that once had been blue, but was now
faded to a melancholy shade of green. The eyes, staring at
the youth, had changed to the dull hue to be seen on the
side of a dead fish. The mouth was open. Its red had changed
CHAPTER 7 51
4. ado. Time-wasting bother over trivial details
5. wended. Traveled on his way
6. bog tufts. Marsh grass
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
a • ver • sion (ə vər´zhən) n., feeling of
repulsion or distaste toward something
with a desire to avoid or turn from it
jo • vial (jo￣´ve￣ əl) adj., good-humored; merry
trep • i • da • tion (tre pə da￣´shən) n.,
fearful uncertain agitation
mire (m_￣r) n., spongy earth (as of a bog or
marsh)
_ What
“experiment” does
the youth perform?
What does he see as
the lesson of this
experiment?
_ To what does the
youth compare this
place in the woods?
_ What does the
youth see that fills
him with horror?
to an appalling yellow. Over the gray skin of the face ran little
ants. One was trundling some sort of a bundle along the
upper lip.
The youth gave a shriek as he confronted the thing. He
was for moments turned to stone before it. He remained staring
into the liquid-looking eyes. The dead man and the living
man exchanged a long look. Then the youth cautiously
put one hand behind him and brought it against a tree.
Leaning upon this he retreated, step by step, with his face
still toward the thing. He feared that if he turned his back
the body might spring up and stealthily pursue him.
The branches, pushing against him, threatened to throw
him over upon it. His unguided feet, too, caught aggravatingly
in brambles; and with it all he received a subtle suggestion
to touch the corpse. As he thought of his hand upon
it he shuddered profoundly.
At last he burst the bonds which had fastened him to the
spot and fled, unheeding the underbrush. He was pursued by
a sight of the black ants swarming greedily upon the gray
face and venturing horribly near to the eyes.
After a time he paused, and, breathless and panting, listened.
He imagined some strange voice would come from
the dead throat and squawk after him in horrible menaces.
The trees about the portal of the chapel moved soughingly7
in a soft wind. A sad silence was upon the little guarding
edifice.
52 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
ap • pall • ing (ə pôl´iŋ) adj., inspiring horror, dismay, or
disgust
ed • i • fice (e´dəfəs) n., building
_ What detail
attracts the youth’s
attention?
_ What do the
youth and the dead
man do?
_ What thought
“pursues” the youth?
_ What is the youth
afraid he will hear?
What does he
actually hear?
7. soughingly. With a moaning or sighing sound
Investigate, Inquire, and Imagine
CHAPTERS 4–7 53
Recall: GATHERING FACTS
1a. In Chapter 4, what does the
304th regiment witness in the battle?
What do they see another regiment
do? What does seeing this make Henry
think he will do? In Chapter 5, what
does the 304th regiment do when the
enemy charges? When the “red rage”
comes over Henry, what does he wish
he could do?
2a. As Chapter 6 begins, what does
Henry think about war and himself?
What does Henry begin to think
about the enemy? What does Henry
do once the battle begins again? Is
he alone in doing this? What does
he discover about the battle at the
end of Chapter 6?
3a. In Chapter 7, what does Henry
tell himself is the reason he fled?
What does he think of the men who
remained in position? Where does
Henry go to escape from the sounds
of battle? What “experiment” does
Henry conduct there? To what is a
small clearing in this place compared?
What does the youth find in
this clearing? What is Henry’s reaction
to finding this thing here?
Analyze: TAKING THINGS APART
4a. In what way is battle depicted in
Chapters 4–7? In what way is death
depicted? Identify some examples of
vivid descriptions of battle scenes
and of men being injured or dying.
Interpret: FINDING MEANING
1b. Evaluate how Henry behaves in
battle, in Chapter 5. How does he
exceed his own expectations? What
feelings motivate him to perform
this way? At the end of Chapter 5,
did you believe that Henry had conquered
his fear of running from battle?
Explain.
2b. Are Henry’s ideas about war and
himself justified based on what he
has experienced and done? Why, or
why not? Explain why Henry reacts
as he does to the battle. What does
the news about the battle at the end
of Chapter 6 reveal about Henry’s
fears? What does it reveal about
what he has done?
3b. Explain whether you agree with
Henry’s assessment of his decision.
Why do you think he regards his
decision in this way and seeks to
support it in an “experiment”?
Explain why the setting in which the
thing is placed makes finding it
there even more horrible. Why do
you think Crane uses words like “it”
and “thing” to describe what Henry
finds?
Synthesize: BRINGING THINGS TOGETHER
4b. Explain whether you believe that
Crane is depicting war and its consequences
realistically or whether his
images of war are not convincing.
What attitude toward war and its
consequences do you think the
author reveals in these chapters?
➛
➛
➛
➛
Respond to the Selection
To what extent can you sympathize with Henry’s (the youth’s) decision to run?
As a class, discuss decisions that people make based on fear. What are some
examples? What do you think of the quality of decisions based on fear?
Understanding Literature
Foreshadowing. Foreshadowing is the act of hinting at events that will happen
later in a poem, story, or play. In what way is Henry’s decision to run from battle
foreshadowed before he does so? Point to some examples of passages that
might foreshadow Henry’s action.
Metaphor. A metaphor is a figure of speech in which one thing is spoken or
written about as if it were another. The figure of speech invites the reader to
make a comparison between the two things. For example, in the line from
Chapter 6, “The shells . . . looked to be strange war flowers bursting into fierce
bloom,” the exploding bombs launched by artillery are described as if they were
blooming flowers. What two things are compared in each of the following lines?
In what ways are they similar? In what ways are they different?
The men groaned. . . . watched in sullen mood the frantic approach of the
enemy. The slaves toiling in the temple of this god began to feel rebellion at
his harsh tasks.
To the youth it was an onslaught of redoubtable dragons. . . He seemed to
shut his eyes and wait to be gobbled.
54 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
Evaluate: MAKING JUDGMENTS
5a. Explain whether Henry’s actions
make him a coward. What do you
think about his decision to leave his
regiment? Was it a smart decision? A
moral or ethical decision? Explain
whether you would have done the
same thing in his position. Do you
think you can truly know how you
would react in such a situation without
living through it? Why, or why
not?
Extend: CONNECTING IDEAS
5b. People in different time periods
and cultures have held different attitudes
about participating in a war.
Desertion was viewed as a serious
crime during the Civil War. People
who ran from the battlefield were
punished in many ways, and not
always through proper military channels
and trials. Some were publicly
humiliated; others were branded or
tortured; some were executed.
Discuss how you think Henry’s
actions would be viewed by each of
the following people: A) A commander
of the Union army who
wants to maintain strict order
among his men; B) Henry’s friend
Wilson (the loud soldier) who has
also admitted to feeling fear before
battle; C) A protestor and conscientious
objector to the Vietnam War in
the year 1969; D) Someone you
know whose mother or father has
made a career in the military;
E) Someone in your class who holds
human life to be sacred
➛
Chapter 8
The trees began softly to sing a hymn of twilight. The sun
sank until slanted bronze rays struck the forest. There was a
lull in the noises of insects as if they had bowed their beaks
and were making a devotional pause. There was silence save
for the chanted chorus of the trees.
Then, upon this stillness, there suddenly broke a tremendous
clangor of sounds. A crimson roar came from the distance.
The youth stopped. He was transfixed by this terrific medley
of all noises. It was as if worlds were being rended. There
was the ripping sound of musketry and the breaking crash of
the artillery.
His mind flew in all directions. He conceived the two
armies to be at each other panther fashion.1 He listened for
a time. Then he began to run in the direction of the battle.
He saw that it was an ironical thing for him to be running
thus toward that which he had been at such pains to avoid.
But he said, in substance, to himself that if the earth and the
moon were about to clash, many persons would doubtless
plan to get upon the roofs to witness the collision.
As he ran, he became aware that the forest had stopped its
music, as if at last becoming capable of hearing the foreign
sounds. The trees hushed and stood motionless. Everything
seemed to be listening to the crackle and clatter and earshaking
thunder. The chorus pealed over the still earth.
It suddenly occurred to the youth that the fight in which
he had been was, after all, but perfunctory popping.2 In the
hearing of this present din he was doubtful if he had seen
real battle scenes. This uproar explained a celestial battle; it
was tumbling hordes a-struggle in the air.
Reflecting, he saw a sort of a humor in the point of view
of himself and his fellows during the late encounter. They
had taken themselves and the enemy very seriously and had
imagined that they were deciding the war. Individuals must
have supposed that they were cutting the letters of their
CHAPTER 8 55
1. panther fashion. Like panthers; exceptionally fierce
2. popping. Shooting
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
lull (ləl) n., temporary pause or decline in
activity
iron • i • cal (_￣ rə´ni kəl) adj., incompatibility
between the actual result of a sequence
of events and the normal or expected result
peal (pe￣l) vt., chime, ring out
per • func • to • ry (pər fəŋ(k) tə re￣) adj.,
characterized by routine or superficiality;
mechanical
_ What interrupts
the stillness?
_ Where does the
youth run? What
does he realize about
his decision to run in
this direction?
_ What does the
youth realize about
the battle he
witnessed?
_ What thought
amuses the youth?
names deep into everlasting tablets of brass, or enshrining
their reputations forever in the hearts of their countrymen,
while, as to fact, the affair would appear in printed reports
under a meek and immaterial title. But he saw that it was
good, else, he said, in battle every one would surely run save
forlorn hopes and their ilk.
He went rapidly on. He wished to come to the edge of the
forest that he might peer out.
As he hastened, there passed through his mind pictures of
stupendous conflicts. His accumulated thought upon such
subjects was used to form scenes. The noise was as the voice
of an eloquent being, describing.
Sometimes the brambles formed chains and tried to hold
him back. Trees, confronting him, stretched out their arms
and forbade him to pass. After its previous hostility this new
resistance of the forest filled him with a fine bitterness. It
seemed that Nature could not be quite ready to kill him.
But he obstinately took roundabout ways, and presently
he was where he could see long gray walls of vapor where lay
battle lines. The voices of cannon shook him. The musketry
sounded in long irregular surges that played havoc with his
ears. He stood regardant for a moment. His eyes had an
awestruck expression. He gawked in the direction of the
fight.
Presently he proceeded again on his forward way. The battle
was like the grinding of an immense and terrible machine
to him. Its complexities and powers, its grim processes, fascinated
him. He must go close and see it produce corpses.
He came to a fence and clambered over it. On the far side,
the ground was littered with clothes and guns. A newspaper,
folded up, lay in the dirt. A dead soldier was stretched with
his face hidden in his arm. Farther off there was a group of
four or five corpses keeping mournful company. A hot sun
had blazed upon the spot.
In this place the youth felt that he was an invader. This
forgotten part of the battle ground was owned by the dead
men, and he hurried, in the vague apprehension that one of
the swollen forms would rise and tell him to begone.
He came finally to a road from which he could see in the
distance dark and agitated bodies of troops, smoke-fringed.
In the lane was a blood-stained crowd streaming to the rear.
56 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
en • shrine (en shr_￣n´) vt., preserve or
cherish as sacred
im • ma • te • ri • al (i mə tir´e￣ əl) adj., of
no substantial consequence; unimportant
ilk (ilk) n., sort, kind
el • o • quent (e´lə kwənt) adj., marked
by forceful and fluent expression
_ To what does the
youth compare war?
_ How does the
youth feel about
entering the part of
the battleground
where only the dead
remain?
The wounded men were cursing, groaning, and wailing. In
the air, always, was a mighty swell of sound that it seemed
could sway the earth. With the courageous words of the
artillery and the spiteful sentences of the musketry mingled
red cheers. And from this region of noises came the steady
current of the maimed.
One of the wounded men had a shoeful of blood. He
hopped like a schoolboy in a game. He was laughing hysterically.
One was swearing that he had been shot in the arm
through the commanding general’s mismanagement of the
army. One was marching with an air imitative of some sublime
drum major. Upon his features was an unholy mixture
of merriment and agony. As he marched he sang a bit of doggerel
in a high and quavering voice:
“Sing a song ’a vic’try,
A pocketful ’a bullets,
Five an’ twenty dead men
Baked in a—pie.”3
Parts of the procession limped and staggered to this tune.
Another had the gray seal of death already upon his face.
His lips were curled in hard lines and his teeth were clinched.
His hands were bloody from where he had pressed them
upon his wound. He seemed to be awaiting the moment
when he should pitch headlong. He stalked like the specter
of a soldier, his eyes burning with the power of a stare into
the unknown.
There were some who proceeded sullenly, full of anger at
their wounds, and ready to turn upon anything as an
obscure cause.
An officer was carried along by two privates. He was peevish.
“Don’t joggle so, Johnson, yeh fool,” he cried. “Think
m’ leg is made of iron? If yeh can’t carry me decent, put me
down an’ let some one else do it.”
He bellowed at the tottering crowd who blocked the quick
CHAPTER 8 57
3. “Sing . . . pie.” The injured soldier is singing his own grim version of these
lines from the nursery rhyme, “Sing a Song of Sixpence”: “Sing a song of sixpence,/
A pocket full of rye;/Four and twenty blackbirds/Baked in a pie.”
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
sub • lime (sə bl_￣m´) adj., lofty, grand, or
exalted in thought, expression, or manner
dog • ger • el (dô´gə rəl) n., verse styled
for comic effect or to mock
pee • vish (pe￣´vish) adj., marked by illtemper
tot • ter • ing (tô´tər iŋ) adj., being in an
unstable condition
_ What type of men
does the youth meet
upon the road?
_ What is one
wounded man
doing? To what is he
compared?
_ About what does
one wounded man
sing?
_ What can the
youth tell about what
will happen to one of
the injured men?
How can he tell?
march of his bearers. “Say, make way there, can’t yeh? Make
way, dickens take it all.”
They sulkily parted and went to the roadsides. As he was
carried past they made pert remarks to him. When he raged
in reply and threatened them, they told him to be damned.
The shoulder of one of the tramping bearers knocked
heavily against the spectral soldier who was staring into the
unknown.
The youth joined this crowd and marched along with it.
The torn bodies expressed the awful machinery in which the
men had been entangled.
Orderlies and couriers occasionally broke through the
throng in the roadway, scattering wounded men right and
left, galloping on followed by howls. The melancholy march
was continually disturbed by the messengers, and sometimes
by bustling batteries that came swinging and thumping
down upon them, the officers shouting orders to clear the
way.
There was a tattered man, fouled with dust, blood and
powder stain from hair to shoes, who trudged quietly at the
youth’s side. He was listening with eagerness and much
humility to the lurid descriptions of a bearded sergeant. His
lean features wore an expression of awe and admiration. He
was like a listener in a country store to wondrous tales told
among the sugar barrels. He eyed the story-teller with
unspeakable wonder. His mouth was agape in yokel4 fashion.
The sergeant, taking note of this, gave pause to his elaborate
history while he administered a sardonic comment. “Be
keerful, honey, you’ll be a-ketchin’ flies,” he said.
The tattered man shrank back abashed.
After a time he began to sidle near to the youth, and in a
diffident way try to make him a friend. His voice was gentle
as a girl’s voice and his eyes were pleading. The youth saw
with surprise that the soldier had two wounds, one in the
head, bound with a blood-soaked rag, and the other in the
arm, making that member dangle like a broken bough.
After they had walked together for some time the tattered
man mustered sufficient courage to speak. “Was pretty good
58 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
4. yokel. Demeaning term for a naïve or ignorant resident of a rural area or a
small town
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
pert (pərt) adj., rudely free and forward
sar • don • ic (sär də´nik) adj., disdainfully
or skeptically humorous
abash (ə bash´) vt., destroy the self-possession
or self-confidence of
si • dle (s_￣´d_l) vi., go or move with one
side foremost, especially in a furtive advance
_ Whom does the
youth find at his
side?
_ What does the
tattered man seem to
want of the youth?
_ What does the
youth notice about
the tattered man?
fight, wa’n’t it?” he timidly said. The youth, deep in
thought, glanced up at the bloody and grim figure with its
lamblike eyes. “What?”
“Was pretty good fight, wa’n’t it?”
“Yes,” said the youth shortly. He quickened his pace.
But the other hobbled industriously after him. There was
an air of apology in his manner, but he evidently thought
that he needed only to talk for a time, and the youth would
perceive that he was a good fellow.
“Was pretty good fight, wa’n’t it?” he began in a small
voice, and then he achieved the fortitude to continue. “Dern
me if I ever see fellers fight so. Laws, how they did fight! I
knowed th’ boys ’d lick when they onct got square at it. Th’
boys ain’t had no fair chanct up t’ now, but this time they
showed what they was. I knowed it ’d turn out this way. Yeh
can’t lick them boys. No, sir! They’re fighters, they be.”
He breathed a deep breath of humble admiration. He had
looked at the youth for encouragement several times. He
received none, but gradually he seemed to get absorbed in
his subject.
“I was talkin’ ’cross pickets with a boy from Georgie, onct,
an’ that boy, he ses, ‘Your fellers ’ll all run like hell when they
onct hearn a gun,’ he ses. ‘Mebbe they will,’ I ses, ‘but I don’t
b’lieve none of it,’ I ses; ‘an’ b’jiminey,’ I ses back t’ ’um,
’mebbe your fellers ‘ll all run like hell when they onct hearn
a gun,’ I ses. He larfed. Well, they didn’t run t’ day, did they,
hey? No, sir! They fit, an’ fit, an’ fit.”
His homely face was suffused with a light of love for the
army which was to him all things beautiful and powerful.
After a time he turned to the youth. “Where yeh hit, ol’
boy?” he asked in a brotherly tone.
The youth felt instant panic at this question, although at
first its full import was not borne in upon him.
“What?” he asked.
“Where yeh hit?” repeated the tattered man.
“Why,” began the youth, “I—I—that is—why—I—”
He turned away suddenly and slid through the crowd. His
brow was heavily flushed, and his fingers were picking nervously
at one of his buttons. He bent his head and fastened his
eyes studiously upon the button as if it were a little problem.
The tattered man looked after him in astonishment.
CHAPTER 8 59 WWords
For
Everyday
Use
for • ti • tude (fôr´tə to—_od) n., strength
of mind that enables a person to
encounter danger or bear pain or adversity
with courage
suf • fuse (sə fyo—_oz´) vt., spread over or
through in the manner of fluid or light
_ What type of
manner does the
tattered man have?
_ What did a boy
from Georgia tell the
tattered man? About
what is the tattered
man proud?
_ What does the
tattered man ask the
youth? How does this
question make the
youth feel?
Chapter 9
The youth fell back in the procession until the tattered
soldier was not in sight. Then he started to walk on with the
others.
But he was amid wounds. The mob of men was bleeding.
Because of the tattered soldier’s question he now felt that his
shame could be viewed. He was continually casting sidelong
glances to see if the men were contemplating the letters of
guilt he felt burned into his brow.1
At times he regarded the wounded soldiers in an envious
way. He conceived persons with torn bodies to be peculiarly
happy. He wished that he, too, had a wound, a red badge of
courage.
The spectral soldier was at his side like a stalking reproach.
The man’s eyes were still fixed in a stare into the unknown.
His gray, appalling face had attracted attention in the crowd,
and men, slowing to his dreary pace, were walking with him.
They were discussing his plight, questioning him and giving
him advice. In a dogged way he repelled them, signing to
them to go on and leave him alone. The shadows of his face
were deepening and his tight lips seemed holding in check
the moan of great despair. There could be seen a certain stiffness
in the movements of his body, as if he were taking infinite
care not to arouse the passion of his wounds. As he went
on, he seemed always looking for a place, like one who goes
to choose a grave.
Something in the gesture of the man as he waved the
bloody and pitying soldiers away made the youth start as if
bitten. He yelled in horror. Tottering forward he laid a quivering
hand upon the man’s arm. As the latter slowly turned
his waxlike features toward him, the youth screamed:
“Gawd! Jim Conklin!”
The tall soldier made a little commonplace smile. “Hello,
Henry,” he said.
The youth swayed on his legs and glared strangely. He
60 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
1. guilt . . . brow. During the Civil War, deserters were sometimes punished in
cruel ways; one method of punishment was branding, where the letter D for
deserter would be branded with a hot iron onto the accused’s face.
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
pro • ces • sion (prə se´shən) n., group of
individuals moving along in an orderly
often ceremonial way
re • proach (ri pro￣ch´) n., expression of
blame or disapproval
drea • ry (drir´e￣) adj., feeling, displaying,
or reflecting listlessness or discouragement
com • mon • place (kə´mən pla￣s) n.,
something commonly found
_ What does the
tattered man’s
question cause the
youth to feel?
_ For what does the
youth wish?
_ Whom does the
youth run into
again?
_ What does the
spectral soldier seem
to be doing as he
walks?
_ Who is the
spectral soldier?
stuttered and stammered. “Oh, Jim—oh, Jim—oh, Jim—oh
Jim—”
The tall soldier held out his gory hand. There was a curious
red and black combination of new blood and old blood
upon it. “Where yeh been, Henry?” he asked. He continued
in a monotonous voice, “I thought mebbe yeh got keeled
over. There’s been thunder t’ pay t’-day. I was worryin’ about
it a good deal.”
The youth still lamented. “Oh, Jim—oh, Jim—oh, Jim—”
“Yeh know,” said the tall soldier, “I was out there.” He
made a careful gesture. “An’, Lord, what a circus! An’,
b’jiminey, I got shot—I got shot. Yes, b’jiminey, I got shot.”
He reiterated this fact in a bewildered way, as if he did not
know how it came about.
The youth put forth anxious arms to assist him, but the
tall soldier went firmly on as if propelled. Since the youth’s
arrival as a guardian for his friend, the other wounded men
had ceased to display much interest. They occupied themselves
again in dragging their own tragedies toward the rear.
Suddenly, as the two friends marched on, the tall soldier
seemed to be overcome by a terror. His face turned to a semblance
of gray paste. He clutched the youth’s arm and looked
all about him, as if dreading to be overheard. Then he began
to speak in a shaking whisper: “I tell yeh what I’m ’fraid of,
Henry—I’ll tell yeh what I’m ’fraid of. I’m ’fraid I’ll fall
down—an’ then yeh know—them damned artillery wagons2—
they like as not ’ll run over me. That’s what I’m ’fraid
of—”
The youth cried out to him hysterically: “I’ll take care of
yeh, Jim! I’ll take care of yeh! I swear t’ Gawd I will!”
“Sure—will yeh, Henry?” the tall soldier beseeched.
“Yes—yes—I tell yeh—I’ll take care of yeh, Jim!” protested
the youth. He could not speak accurately because of the
gulpings in his throat.
But the tall soldier continued to beg in a lowly way. He
now hung babelike to the youth’s arm. His eyes rolled in the
wildness of his terror. “I was allus a good friend t’ yeh, wa’n’t
I, Henry? I’ve allus been a pretty good feller, ain’t I? An’ it
CHAPTER 9 61
2. artillery wagons. Horse-drawn wagons in which the large guns were
carried
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
gory (go￣r´e) adj., bloodstained
re • it • er • ate (re￣ i´tər a￣t) vt., state or
do over again or repeatedly sometimes
with wearying effect
sem • blance (sem´blən(t)s) n., outward
appearance or show
be • seech (bi se￣ch´) vt., beg for urgently
or anxiously
_ About what does
Jim, the tall soldier,
say he has been
worried?
_ What does Jim say
has happened to
him? What does his
mental state seem to
be?
_ Of what is Jim
afraid?
ain’t much t’ ask, is it? Jest t’ pull me along outer th’ road?
I’d do it fer you, wouldn’t I, Henry?”
He paused in piteous anxiety to await his friend’s reply.
The youth had reached an anguish where the sobs
scorched him. He strove to express his loyalty, but he could
only make fantastic gestures.
However, the tall soldier seemed suddenly to forget all
those fears. He became again the grim, stalking specter of a
soldier. He went stonily forward. The youth wished his
friend to lean upon him, but the other always shook his head
and strangely protested. “No—no—no—leave me be—leave
me be—”
His look was fixed again upon the unknown. He moved
with mysterious purpose, and all of the youth’s offers he
brushed aside. “No—no—leave me be—leave me be—”
The youth had to follow.
Presently the latter heard a voice talking softly near his
shoulder. Turning he saw that it belonged to the tattered soldier.
“Ye’d better take ’im outa th’ road, pardner. There’s a
batt’ry comin’ helitywhoop3 down th’ road an’ he’ll git
runned over. He’s a goner anyhow in about five minutes—
yeh kin see that. Ye’d better take ’im outa th’ road. Where th’
blazes does he git his stren’th from?”
“Lord knows!” cried the youth. He was shaking his hands
helplessly.
He ran forward presently and grasped the tall soldier by
the arm. “Jim! Jim!” he coaxed, “come with me.”
The tall soldier weakly tried to wrench himself free.
“Huh,” he said vacantly. He stared at the youth for a
moment. At last he spoke as if dimly comprehending. “Oh!
Inteh th’ fields? Oh!”
He started blindly through the grass.
The youth turned once to look at the lashing riders and
jouncing guns of the battery. He was startled from this view
by a shrill outcry from the tattered man.
“Gawd! He’s runnin’!”
Turning his head swiftly, the youth saw his friend running
in a staggering and stumbling way toward a little clump of
bushes. His heart seemed to wrench itself almost free from
his body at this sight. He made a noise of pain. He and the
tattered man began a pursuit. There was a singular race.
When he overtook the tall soldier he began to plead with
all the words he could find. “Jim—Jim—what are you
doing—what makes you do this way—you’ll hurt yerself.”
62 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
3. helitywhoop. Colorful term meaning “very quickly”
_ Who reappears at
the youth’s side?
What advice does
this person give the
youth? What does
this person admire in
Jim?
_ What seems to be
happening to Jim?
_ What does the
youth see Jim doing?
How does it make
him feel?
_ What does the
youth tell Jim about
his actions? What is
Jim’s response?
The same purpose was in the tall soldier’s face. He
protested in a dulled way, keeping his eyes fastened on the
mystic place of his intentions. “No—no—don’t tech me—
leave me be—leave me be—”
The youth, aghast and filled with wonder at the tall soldier,
began quaveringly to question him. “Where yeh goin’,
Jim? What you thinking about? Where you going? Tell me,
won’t you, Jim?”
The tall soldier faced about as upon relentless pursuers. In
his eyes there was a great appeal. “Leave me be, can’t yeh?
Leave me be fer a minnit.”
The youth recoiled. “Why, Jim,” he said, in a dazed way,
“what’s the matter with you?”
The tall soldier turned and, lurching dangerously, went
on. The youth and the tattered soldier followed, sneaking as
if whipped, feeling unable to face the stricken man if he
should again confront them. They began to have thoughts of
a solemn ceremony. There was something ritelike in these
movements of the doomed soldier. And there was a resemblance
in him to a devotee of a mad religion, blood-sucking,
muscle-wrenching, bone-crushing. They were awed and
afraid. They hung back lest he have at command a dreadful
weapon.
At last, they saw him stop and stand motionless.
Hastening up, they perceived that his face wore an expression
telling that he had at last found the place for which he
had struggled. His spare figure was erect; his bloody hands
were quietly at his side. He was waiting with patience for
something that he had come to meet. He was at the rendezvous.
They paused and stood, expectant.
There was a silence.
Finally, the chest of the doomed soldier began to heave
with a strained motion. It increased in violence until it was
as if an animal was within and was kicking and tumbling
furiously to be free.
This spectacle of gradual strangulation made the youth
writhe, and once as his friend rolled his eyes, he saw something
in them that made him sink wailing to the ground. He
raised his voice in a last supreme call.
“Jim—Jim—Jim—”
CHAPTER 9 63 WWords
For
Everyday
Use
aghast (ə gast´) adj., struck with terror,
amazement, or horror
dev • o • tee (de vô te￣´) n., ardent follower,
supporter, or enthusiast (as of a
religion, art form, or sport)
ren • dez • vous (rən´di vo—_o) n., place
appointed for assembling or meeting
_ How do the youth
and the tattered man
feel about Jim and
his actions?
_ What can they tell
when they see Jim’s
face?
_ Whom or what do
you think Jim has
come to meet at this
place?
The tall soldier opened his lips and spoke. He made a gesture.
“Leave me be—don’t tech me—leave me be—”
There was another silence while he waited.
Suddenly, his form stiffened and straightened. Then it was
shaken by a prolonged ague. He stared into space. To the two
watchers there was a curious and profound dignity in the
firm lines of his awful face.
He was invaded by a creeping strangeness that slowly
enveloped him. For a moment the tremor of his legs caused
him to dance a sort of hideous hornpipe. His arms beat
wildly about his head in expression of implike enthusiasm.
His tall figure stretched itself to its full height. There was
a slight rending sound. Then it began to swing forward, slow
and straight, in the manner of a falling tree. A swift muscular
contortion made the left shoulder strike the ground first.
The body seemed to bounce a little way from the earth.
“God!” said the tattered soldier.
The youth had watched, spellbound, this ceremony at the
place of meeting. His face had been twisted into an expression
of every agony he had imagined for his friend.
He now sprang to his feet and, going closer, gazed upon
the pastelike face. The mouth was open and the teeth
showed in a laugh.
As the flap of the blue jacket fell away from the body, he
could see that the side looked as if it had been chewed by
wolves.
The youth turned, with sudden, livid rage, toward the
battlefield. He shook his fist. He seemed about to deliver a
philippic.
“Hell—”
The red sun was pasted in the sky like a wafer.
64 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
ague (a￣´gyo—_o) n., fit of shivering
con • tor • tion (kən tôr´shən) n., violent
twist
liv • id (li´vəd) adj., very angry; enraged
phi • lip • pic (fə li´pik) n., discourse or
declamation full of bitter condemnation;
tirade
_ What is revealed
about Jim’s injury
when he dies?
_ How does the
youth feel about
what has happened
to his friend?
Chapter 10
The tattered man stood musing.
“Well, he was reg’lar jim-dandy1 fer nerve, wa’n’t he,” said
he finally in a little awestruck voice. “A reg’lar jim-dandy.”
He thoughtfully poked one of the docile hands with his foot.
“I wonner where he got ’is stren’th from? I never seen a man
do like that before. It was a funny thing. Well, he was a
reg’lar jim-dandy.”
The youth desired to screech out his grief. He was stabbed,
but his tongue lay dead in the tomb of his mouth. He threw
himself again upon the ground and began to brood.
The tattered man stood musing.
“Look-a-here, pardner,” he said, after a time. He regarded
the corpse as he spoke. “He’s up an’ gone, ain’t ’e, an’ we
might as well begin t’ look out fer ol’ number one.2 This here
thing is all over. He’s up an’ gone, ain’t ’e? An’ he’s all right
here. Nobody won’t bother ’im. An’ I must say I ain’t enjoying
any great health m’self these days.”
The youth, awakened by the tattered soldier’s tone, looked
quickly up. He saw that he was swinging uncertainly on his
legs and that his face had turned to a shade of blue.
“Good Lord!” he cried, “you ain’t goin’ t’—not you, too.”
The tattered man waved his hand. “Nary die,”3 he said.
“All I want is some pea soup an’ a good bed. Some pea soup,”
he repeated dreamfully.
The youth arose from the ground. “I wonder where he
came from. I left him over there.” He pointed. “And now I
find ’im here. And he was coming from over there, too.” He
indicated a new direction. They both turned toward the
body as if to ask of it a question.
“Well,” at length spoke the tattered man, “there ain’t no
use in our stayin’ here an’ tryin’ t’ ask him anything.”
The youth nodded an assent wearily. They both turned to
gaze for a moment at the corpse.
The youth murmured something.
CHAPTER 10 65
1. jim-dandy. Something or someone excellent for its kind
2. number one. One’s own interests or welfare
3. Nary die. Not going to die
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
doc • ile (də´səl) adj., easily led or managed; obedient
brood (bro—_od) vi., dwell gloomily on a subject
as • sent (ə sent´) n., agreement
_ What is the
tattered man’s
reaction to the event
he and the youth
have witnessed?
_ How does the
youth feel about
what has occurred?
What is he unable to
do? What does he do
instead?
_ What does the
tattered man tell the
youth they should do
now? What does he
say about his own
health?
_ What does the
youth notice about
the tattered soldier?
“Well, he was a jim-dandy, wa’n’t ’e?” said the tattered
man as if in response.
They turned their backs upon it and started away. For a
time they stole softly, treading with their toes. It remained
laughing there in the grass.
“I’m commencin’ t’ feel pretty bad,” said the tattered
man, suddenly breaking one of his little silences. “I’m commencin’
t’ feel pretty damn’ bad.”
The youth groaned. “O Lord!” He wondered if he was to
be the tortured witness of another grim encounter.
But his companion waved his hand reassuringly. “Oh, I’m
not goin’ t’ die yit! There too much dependin’ on me fer me
t’ die yit. No, sir! Nary die! I can’t! Ye’d oughta see th’ swad4
a’ chil’ren I’ve got, an’ all like that.”
The youth glancing at his companion could see by the
shadow of a smile that he was making some kind of fun.
As they plodded on the tattered soldier continued to talk.
“Besides, if I died, I wouldn’t die th’ way that feller did. That
was th’ funniest thing. I’d jest flop down, I would. I never
seen a feller die th’ way that feller did.
“Yeh know Tom Jamison, he lives next door t’ me up
home. He’s a nice feller, he is, an’ we was allus good friends.
Smart, too. Smart as a steel trap. Well, when we was a-fightin’
this atternoon, all-of-a-sudden he begin t’ rip up an’ cuss an’
beller at me. ’Yer shot, yeh blamed infernal!’—he swear horrible—
he ses t’ me. I put up m’ hand t’ m’ head an’ when I
looked at m’ fingers, I seen, sure ’nough, I was shot. I give a
holler an’ begin t’ run, but b’fore I could git away another
one hit me in th’ arm an’ whirl’ me clean ’round. I got
skeared5 when they was all a-shootin’ b’hind me an’ I run t’
beat all, but I cotch it pretty bad. I’ve an idee I’d a’ been
fightin’ yit, if t’was n’t fer Tom Jamison.”
Then he made a calm announcement: “There’s two of
’em6—little ones—but they ’re beginnin’ t’ have fun with me
now. I don’t b’lieve I kin walk much furder.”
They went slowly on in silence. “Yeh look pretty peaked
yerself,” said the tattered man at last. “I bet yeh’ve got a
worser one than yeh think. Ye’d better take keer of yer hurt.
It don’t do t’ let sech things go. It might be inside mostly, an’
them plays thunder. Where is it located?” But he continued
his harangue without waiting for a reply. “I see a feller git hit
plum in th’ head when my reg’ment was a-standin’ at ease
onct. An’ everybody yelled out to ’im: Hurt, John? Are yeh
66 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
4. swad. Bunch
5. skeared. Scared
6. two of ‘em. The tattered man is referring to his children.
_ What does the
tattered man say
about how he is
feeling? What
concerns the youth?
_ According to the
tattered soldier, why
can’t he die yet?
_ Who let the
tattered man know
he was injured?
Where is the tattered
man injured? What
does the tattered
man say he would be
doing if not for this
person?
_ Whom does the
tattered man think
of? What does he say
he is unable to do
any longer?
_ About what does
the tattered man
express concern?
_ According to the
tattered man, what
happened to another
soldier who thought
his injury wasn’t
serious?
hurt much? ‘No,’ ses he. He looked kinder surprised, an’ he
went on tellin’ ’em how he felt. He sed he didn’t feel nothin’.
But, by dad, th’ first thing that feller knowed he was dead.
Yes, he was dead—stone dead. So, yeh wanta watch out. Yeh
might have some queer kind ’a hurt yerself. Yeh can’t never
tell. Where is your’n located?”
The youth had been wriggling since the introduction of
this topic. He now gave a cry of exasperation and made a
furious motion with his hand. “Oh, don’t bother me!” he
said. He was enraged against the tattered man, and could
have strangled him. His companions seemed ever to play
intolerable parts. They were ever upraising the ghost of
shame on the stick of their curiosity. He turned toward the
tattered man as one at bay. “Now, don’t bother me,” he
repeated with desperate menace.
“Well, Lord knows I don’t wanta bother anybody,” said
the other. There was a little accent of despair in his voice as
he replied, “Lord knows I’ve gota ’nough m’ own t’ tend to.”
The youth, who had been holding a bitter debate with
himself and casting glances of hatred and contempt at the
tattered man, here spoke in a hard voice. “Good-by,” he said.
The tattered man looked at him in gaping amazement.
“Why—why, pardner, where yeh goin’?” he asked unsteadily.
The youth looking at him, could see that he, too, like that
other one, was beginning to act dumb and animal-like. His
thoughts seemed to be floundering about in his head.
“Now—now—look—a—here, you Tom Jamison—now—I
won’t have this—this here won’t do. Where—where yeh
goin’?”
The youth pointed vaguely. “Over there,” he replied.
“Well, now look—a—here—now,” said the tattered man,
rambling on in idiot fashion. His head was hanging forward
and his words were slurred. “This thing won’t do, now, Tom
Jamison. It won’t do. I know yeh, yeh pig-headed devil. Yeh
wanta go trompin’ off with a bad hurt. It ain’t right—now—
Tom Jamison—it ain’t. Yeh wanta leave me take keer of yeh,
Tom Jamison. It ain’t—right—it ain’t—fer yeh t’ go—
trompin’ off—with a bad hurt—it ain’t—ain’t—ain’t right—
it ain’t.”
In reply the youth climbed a fence and started away. He
could hear the tattered man bleating plaintively.
The youth turned once to look at the lashing riders and
jouncing guns of the battery. He was startled from this view
by a shrill outcry from the tattered man.
“Gawd! He’s runnin’!”
Turning his head swiftly, the youth saw his friend running
in a staggering and stumbling way toward a little clump of
bushes. His heart seemed to wrench itself almost free from
his body at this sight. He made a noise of pain. He and the
tattered man began a pursuit. There was a singular race.
When he overtook the tall soldier he began to plead with
all the words he could find. “Jim—Jim—what are you
doing—what makes you do this way—you’ll hurt yerself.”
62 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
3. helitywhoop. Colorful term meaning “very quickly”
_ Who reappears at
the youth’s side?
What advice does
this person give the
youth? What does
this person admire in
Jim?
_ What seems to be
happening to Jim?
_ What does the
youth see Jim doing?
How does it make
him feel?
_ What does the
youth tell Jim about
his actions? What is
Jim’s response?
The same purpose was in the tall soldier’s face. He
protested in a dulled way, keeping his eyes fastened on the
mystic place of his intentions. “No—no—don’t tech me—
leave me be—leave me be—”
The youth, aghast and filled with wonder at the tall soldier,
began quaveringly to question him. “Where yeh goin’,
Jim? What you thinking about? Where you going? Tell me,
won’t you, Jim?”
The tall soldier faced about as upon relentless pursuers. In
his eyes there was a great appeal. “Leave me be, can’t yeh?
Leave me be fer a minnit.”
The youth recoiled. “Why, Jim,” he said, in a dazed way,
“what’s the matter with you?”
The tall soldier turned and, lurching dangerously, went
on. The youth and the tattered soldier followed, sneaking as
if whipped, feeling unable to face the stricken man if he
should again confront them. They began to have thoughts of
a solemn ceremony. There was something ritelike in these
movements of the doomed soldier. And there was a resemblance
in him to a devotee of a mad religion, blood-sucking,
muscle-wrenching, bone-crushing. They were awed and
afraid. They hung back lest he have at command a dreadful
weapon.
At last, they saw him stop and stand motionless.
Hastening up, they perceived that his face wore an expression
telling that he had at last found the place for which he
had struggled. His spare figure was erect; his bloody hands
were quietly at his side. He was waiting with patience for
something that he had come to meet. He was at the rendezvous.
They paused and stood, expectant.
There was a silence.
Finally, the chest of the doomed soldier began to heave
with a strained motion. It increased in violence until it was
as if an animal was within and was kicking and tumbling
furiously to be free.
This spectacle of gradual strangulation made the youth
writhe, and once as his friend rolled his eyes, he saw something
in them that made him sink wailing to the ground. He
raised his voice in a last supreme call.
“Jim—Jim—Jim—”
CHAPTER 9 63 WWords
For
Everyday
Use
aghast (ə gast´) adj., struck with terror,
amazement, or horror
dev • o • tee (de vô te￣´) n., ardent follower,
supporter, or enthusiast (as of a
religion, art form, or sport)
ren • dez • vous (rən´di vo—_o) n., place
appointed for assembling or meeting
_ How do the youth
and the tattered man
feel about Jim and
his actions?
_ What can they tell
when they see Jim’s
face?
_ Whom or what do
you think Jim has
come to meet at this
place?
The tall soldier opened his lips and spoke. He made a gesture.
“Leave me be—don’t tech me—leave me be—”
There was another silence while he waited.
Suddenly, his form stiffened and straightened. Then it was
shaken by a prolonged ague. He stared into space. To the two
watchers there was a curious and profound dignity in the
firm lines of his awful face.
He was invaded by a creeping strangeness that slowly
enveloped him. For a moment the tremor of his legs caused
him to dance a sort of hideous hornpipe. His arms beat
wildly about his head in expression of implike enthusiasm.
His tall figure stretched itself to its full height. There was
a slight rending sound. Then it began to swing forward, slow
and straight, in the manner of a falling tree. A swift muscular
contortion made the left shoulder strike the ground first.
The body seemed to bounce a little way from the earth.
“God!” said the tattered soldier.
The youth had watched, spellbound, this ceremony at the
place of meeting. His face had been twisted into an expression
of every agony he had imagined for his friend.
He now sprang to his feet and, going closer, gazed upon
the pastelike face. The mouth was open and the teeth
showed in a laugh.
As the flap of the blue jacket fell away from the body, he
could see that the side looked as if it had been chewed by
wolves.
The youth turned, with sudden, livid rage, toward the
battlefield. He shook his fist. He seemed about to deliver a
philippic.
“Hell—”
The red sun was pasted in the sky like a wafer.
64 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
ague (a￣´gyo—_o) n., fit of shivering
con • tor • tion (kən tôr´shən) n., violent
twist
liv • id (li´vəd) adj., very angry; enraged
phi • lip • pic (fə li´pik) n., discourse or
declamation full of bitter condemnation;
tirade
_ What is revealed
about Jim’s injury
when he dies?
_ How does the
youth feel about
what has happened
to his friend?
Chapter 10
The tattered man stood musing.
“Well, he was reg’lar jim-dandy1 fer nerve, wa’n’t he,” said
he finally in a little awestruck voice. “A reg’lar jim-dandy.”
He thoughtfully poked one of the docile hands with his foot.
“I wonner where he got ’is stren’th from? I never seen a man
do like that before. It was a funny thing. Well, he was a
reg’lar jim-dandy.”
The youth desired to screech out his grief. He was stabbed,
but his tongue lay dead in the tomb of his mouth. He threw
himself again upon the ground and began to brood.
The tattered man stood musing.
“Look-a-here, pardner,” he said, after a time. He regarded
the corpse as he spoke. “He’s up an’ gone, ain’t ’e, an’ we
might as well begin t’ look out fer ol’ number one.2 This here
thing is all over. He’s up an’ gone, ain’t ’e? An’ he’s all right
here. Nobody won’t bother ’im. An’ I must say I ain’t enjoying
any great health m’self these days.”
The youth, awakened by the tattered soldier’s tone, looked
quickly up. He saw that he was swinging uncertainly on his
legs and that his face had turned to a shade of blue.
“Good Lord!” he cried, “you ain’t goin’ t’—not you, too.”
The tattered man waved his hand. “Nary die,”3 he said.
“All I want is some pea soup an’ a good bed. Some pea soup,”
he repeated dreamfully.
The youth arose from the ground. “I wonder where he
came from. I left him over there.” He pointed. “And now I
find ’im here. And he was coming from over there, too.” He
indicated a new direction. They both turned toward the
body as if to ask of it a question.
“Well,” at length spoke the tattered man, “there ain’t no
use in our stayin’ here an’ tryin’ t’ ask him anything.”
The youth nodded an assent wearily. They both turned to
gaze for a moment at the corpse.
The youth murmured something.
CHAPTER 10 65
1. jim-dandy. Something or someone excellent for its kind
2. number one. One’s own interests or welfare
3. Nary die. Not going to die
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
doc • ile (də´səl) adj., easily led or managed; obedient
brood (bro—_od) vi., dwell gloomily on a subject
as • sent (ə sent´) n., agreement
_ What is the
tattered man’s
reaction to the event
he and the youth
have witnessed?
_ How does the
youth feel about
what has occurred?
What is he unable to
do? What does he do
instead?
_ What does the
tattered man tell the
youth they should do
now? What does he
say about his own
health?
_ What does the
youth notice about
the tattered soldier?
“Well, he was a jim-dandy, wa’n’t ’e?” said the tattered
man as if in response.
They turned their backs upon it and started away. For a
time they stole softly, treading with their toes. It remained
laughing there in the grass.
“I’m commencin’ t’ feel pretty bad,” said the tattered
man, suddenly breaking one of his little silences. “I’m commencin’
t’ feel pretty damn’ bad.”
The youth groaned. “O Lord!” He wondered if he was to
be the tortured witness of another grim encounter.
But his companion waved his hand reassuringly. “Oh, I’m
not goin’ t’ die yit! There too much dependin’ on me fer me
t’ die yit. No, sir! Nary die! I can’t! Ye’d oughta see th’ swad4
a’ chil’ren I’ve got, an’ all like that.”
The youth glancing at his companion could see by the
shadow of a smile that he was making some kind of fun.
As they plodded on the tattered soldier continued to talk.
“Besides, if I died, I wouldn’t die th’ way that feller did. That
was th’ funniest thing. I’d jest flop down, I would. I never
seen a feller die th’ way that feller did.
“Yeh know Tom Jamison, he lives next door t’ me up
home. He’s a nice feller, he is, an’ we was allus good friends.
Smart, too. Smart as a steel trap. Well, when we was a-fightin’
this atternoon, all-of-a-sudden he begin t’ rip up an’ cuss an’
beller at me. ’Yer shot, yeh blamed infernal!’—he swear horrible—
he ses t’ me. I put up m’ hand t’ m’ head an’ when I
looked at m’ fingers, I seen, sure ’nough, I was shot. I give a
holler an’ begin t’ run, but b’fore I could git away another
one hit me in th’ arm an’ whirl’ me clean ’round. I got
skeared5 when they was all a-shootin’ b’hind me an’ I run t’
beat all, but I cotch it pretty bad. I’ve an idee I’d a’ been
fightin’ yit, if t’was n’t fer Tom Jamison.”
Then he made a calm announcement: “There’s two of
’em6—little ones—but they ’re beginnin’ t’ have fun with me
now. I don’t b’lieve I kin walk much furder.”
They went slowly on in silence. “Yeh look pretty peaked
yerself,” said the tattered man at last. “I bet yeh’ve got a
worser one than yeh think. Ye’d better take keer of yer hurt.
It don’t do t’ let sech things go. It might be inside mostly, an’
them plays thunder. Where is it located?” But he continued
his harangue without waiting for a reply. “I see a feller git hit
plum in th’ head when my reg’ment was a-standin’ at ease
onct. An’ everybody yelled out to ’im: Hurt, John? Are yeh
66 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
4. swad. Bunch
5. skeared. Scared
6. two of ‘em. The tattered man is referring to his children.
_ What does the
tattered man say
about how he is
feeling? What
concerns the youth?
_ According to the
tattered soldier, why
can’t he die yet?
_ Who let the
tattered man know
he was injured?
Where is the tattered
man injured? What
does the tattered
man say he would be
doing if not for this
person?
_ Whom does the
tattered man think
of? What does he say
he is unable to do
any longer?
_ About what does
the tattered man
express concern?
_ According to the
tattered man, what
happened to another
soldier who thought
his injury wasn’t
serious?
hurt much? ‘No,’ ses he. He looked kinder surprised, an’ he
went on tellin’ ’em how he felt. He sed he didn’t feel nothin’.
But, by dad, th’ first thing that feller knowed he was dead.
Yes, he was dead—stone dead. So, yeh wanta watch out. Yeh
might have some queer kind ’a hurt yerself. Yeh can’t never
tell. Where is your’n located?”
The youth had been wriggling since the introduction of
this topic. He now gave a cry of exasperation and made a
furious motion with his hand. “Oh, don’t bother me!” he
said. He was enraged against the tattered man, and could
have strangled him. His companions seemed ever to play
intolerable parts. They were ever upraising the ghost of
shame on the stick of their curiosity. He turned toward the
tattered man as one at bay. “Now, don’t bother me,” he
repeated with desperate menace.
“Well, Lord knows I don’t wanta bother anybody,” said
the other. There was a little accent of despair in his voice as
he replied, “Lord knows I’ve gota ’nough m’ own t’ tend to.”
The youth, who had been holding a bitter debate with
himself and casting glances of hatred and contempt at the
tattered man, here spoke in a hard voice. “Good-by,” he said.
The tattered man looked at him in gaping amazement.
“Why—why, pardner, where yeh goin’?” he asked unsteadily.
The youth looking at him, could see that he, too, like that
other one, was beginning to act dumb and animal-like. His
thoughts seemed to be floundering about in his head.
“Now—now—look—a—here, you Tom Jamison—now—I
won’t have this—this here won’t do. Where—where yeh
goin’?”
The youth pointed vaguely. “Over there,” he replied.
“Well, now look—a—here—now,” said the tattered man,
rambling on in idiot fashion. His head was hanging forward
and his words were slurred. “This thing won’t do, now, Tom
Jamison. It won’t do. I know yeh, yeh pig-headed devil. Yeh
wanta go trompin’ off with a bad hurt. It ain’t right—now—
Tom Jamison—it ain’t. Yeh wanta leave me take keer of yeh,
Tom Jamison. It ain’t—right—it ain’t—fer yeh t’ go—
trompin’ off—with a bad hurt—it ain’t—ain’t—ain’t right—
it ain’t.”
In reply the youth climbed a fence and started away. He
could hear the tattered man bleating plaintively.
CHAPTER 10 67 WWords

CHAPTER 10 67 WWords
For
Everyday
Use
men • ace (me´nəs) n., show of intention to inflict harm; threat
bleat (ble￣t) vi., whimper; talk complainingly or with a whine
plain • tive • ly (pla￣n´tiv le￣) adv., in a manner expressing woe
or suffering
_ What does the
tattered man ask of
the youth? How does
the youth respond?
_ How does the
youth suddenly feel
toward the tattered
man? What does he
tell him?
_ What does the
youth notice about
the tattered man?
For whom does the
tattered man mistake
the youth?
_ About what is the
tattered man still
concerned? What
does the tattered
man wish to do for
the youth?
_ What does the
youth do? What does
the tattered man do?
Once he faced about angrily. “What?”
“Look—a—here, now, Tom Jamison—now—it ain’t—”
The youth went on. Turning at a distance he saw the tattered
man wandering about helplessly in the field.
He now thought that he wished he was dead. He believed
that he envied those men whose bodies lay strewn over the
grass of the fields and on the fallen leaves of the forest.
The simple questions of the tattered man had been knife
thrusts to him. They asserted a society that probes pitilessly
at secrets until all is apparent. His late companion’s chance
persistency made him feel that he could not keep his crime
concealed in his bosom. It was sure to be brought plain by
one of those arrows which cloud the air and are constantly
pricking, discovering, proclaiming those things which are
willed to be forever hidden. He admitted that he could not
defend himself against this agency. It was not within the
power of vigilance.
68 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
probe (pro￣b) vt., search into and explore with great thoroughness
vig • i • lance (vi´jə lən(t)s) n., quality or state of being
alertly watchful, especially to avoid danger
_ What does the
youth wish? What
did the tattered
man’s questions feel
like to him?
Respond to the Selection
Think about a time when you did something and you later felt guilt or shame
about your actions. Were you aware as you were acting that you would later feel
guilt or shame? If you had a chance to act differently, would you do so?
Investigate, Inquire, and Imagine
CHAPTERS 8–10 69
Recall: GATHERING FACTS
1a. In Chapter 8, what sort of people
does Henry (the youth)
encounter in the road? Describe
some of the actions of these men.
What does the tattered man talk to
Henry about? What questions does
the tattered man ask that surprise
Henry? What does Henry do after
the tattered man asks these questions?
2a. In Chapter 9, what does Henry
realize about the “spectral soldier”?
What does the spectral soldier ask
him to do? Who rejoins Henry, what
does this person suggest, and what
do they see the spectral soldier do?
What happens to the spectral soldier
at the end of Chapter 9?
3a. According to the tattered man,
what attitude should they take
toward the spectral soldier? What
does Henry notice about the tattered
man? What does Henry learn about
the tattered man’s home life? What
does the tattered man ask about
again? What does Henry say to the
tattered man? What does Henry do
to him? In what condition is the tattered
man when Henry does this?
Interpret: FINDING MEANING
1b. Compare and contrast Henry’s
troubles to those of some of the
wounded men. Based on the way
the tattered man is described, his
actions, and his words, what do you
think of the tattered man as a character?
How would you describe him?
Why might all of the tattered man’s
words fill Henry with panic?
2b. How does Henry feel about what
is happening to the spectral soldier?
Why are the spectral soldier’s actions
surprising? How does Henry feel
about what has happened at the
end of Chapter 9? Why do you think
Henry seems more affected emotionally
by this event than by other similar
events he has experienced this
day?
3b. Do you believe that Henry had
an obligation to help the tattered
man? Why, or why not? Could
Henry have done anything to help
him? Why do you think Henry acts
this way toward the tattered man?
In what way have Henry’s actions in
Chapter 10 affected your view of
him as a character?
➛
➛
➛
Understanding Literature
Realism and Description. Realism is the attempt to portray in art or literature an
accurate picture of reality. In the late nineteenth and early twentieth century,
some writers reacted against earlier forms of literature by emphasizing the ordinary
details of life. A description gives a picture in words of a character, object,
or scene. Descriptions use sensory details—words and phrases that describe how
things, look, sound, smell, taste, or feel. Explain whether you would consider the
following examples of realism: the description of the wounded soldiers in Chapter
8, the description of the death of Jim Conklin in Chapter 9, and Henry’s interactions
with the tattered man in Chapter 10. Crane’s writing style includes vivid
descriptions full of sensory detail. Choose a sensory detail from each of the three
scenes mentioned above that seems to be particularly vivid to you.
Symbol. A symbol is a thing that stands for or represents both itself and something
else. Of what might the tattered man be a symbol? Think back on the
questions he asks Henry in both Chapter 8 and Chapter 10.
Antihero. An antihero is a central character who lacks many of the qualities
associated with heroes. An antihero may lack beauty, courage, grace, intelligence,
or moral scruples. Many modern writers focus on antiheroes. Based on
what you have read so far, would you classify Henry as a hero or an antihero?
70 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
Analyze: TAKING THINGS APART
4a. At the beginning of Chapter 8,
Henry lingers about the battle lines
because he thinks of the battle as
“an immense and terrible machine”
that he must see “produce corpses.”
In what way does his attitude about
the results of battle—death and
corpses—change throughout
Chapter 8–10?
Evaluate: MAKING JUDGMENTS
5a. Evaluate and explain the significance
of the title of this novel, The
Red Badge of Courage. Based on what
you have read so far (look to
Chapter 9 for clues), what is a red
badge of courage and why is it significant
to Henry? Why does he long
for one?
Synthesize: BRINGING THINGS TOGETHER
4b. Think back to the way Henry
was at the beginning of Chapter 1—
relatively innocent and naïve about
war. In what way has the knowledge
or experience that Henry has gathered
since that time, and particularly
in Chapters 8–10, affected him in
the short-term? How do you think
this knowledge and experience will
affect him in the long-term?
Extend: CONNECTING IDEAS
5b. What potentially self-destructive
actions can you think of that people
do today? What do you think they
are trying to prove through these
actions? Can you think of better, less
self-destructive ways the same people
might prove the same things to
themselves or to others? What might
Henry do, other than get a red
badge, to prove his courage?
➛
➛
Chapter 11
He became aware that the furnace roar of the battle was
growing louder. Great brown clouds had floated to the still
heights of air before him. The noise, too, was approaching.
The woods filtered men and the fields became dotted.
As he rounded a hillock, he perceived that the roadway
was now a crying mass of wagons, teams, and men. From the
heaving tangle issued exhortations, commands, imprecations.
Fear was sweeping it along. The cracking whips bit and
horses plunged and tugged. The white-topped wagons
strained and stumbled in their exertions like fat sheep.
The youth felt comforted in a measure by this sight. They
were all retreating. Perhaps, then, he was not so bad after all.
He seated himself and watched the terror-stricken wagons.
They fled like soft, ungainly animals. All the roarers and
lashers served to help him to magnify the dangers and horrors
of the engagement that he might try to prove to himself
that the thing with which men could charge him was in
truth a symmetrical act. There was an amount of pleasure to
him in watching the wild march of this vindication.
Presently the calm head of a forward-going column of
infantry appeared in the road. It came swiftly on. Avoiding
the obstructions gave it the sinuous movement of a serpent.
The men at the head butted1 mules with their musket stocks.
They prodded teamsters indifferent to all howls. The men
forced their way through parts of the dense mass by strength.
The blunt head of the column pushed. The raving teamsters
swore many strange oaths.
The commands to make way had the ring of a great
importance in them. The men were going forward to the
heart of the din. They were to confront the eager rush of the
enemy. They felt the pride of their onward movement when
the remainder of the army seemed trying to dribble down
this road. They tumbled teams about with a fine feeling that
it was no matter so long as their column got to the front in
time. This importance made their faces grave and stern. And
the backs of the officers were very rigid.
CHAPTER 11 71
1. butted. Struck or shoved
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
ex • hor • ta • tion (ek sôr ta￣´shən) n., language
intended to incite and encourage
im • pre • ca • tion (im pri ka´shən) n., curse
vin • di • ca • tion (vin də ka￣´shən) n., justification
against denial or censure
sin • u • ous (sin´yə wəs) adj., of a snakelike
or wavy form
_ Who is in the road
now? What is
“sweeping” everyone
along?
_ What are the men
from his side doing?
How does this make
the youth feel about
his own position?
_ Who appears
calm in the midst of
the retreat?
_ Why is this group
of infantry moving
forward rather than
retreating?
As the youth looked at them the black weight of his woe
returned to him. He felt that he was regarding a procession
of chosen beings. The separation was as great to him as if
they had marched with weapons of flame and banners of
sunlight. He could never be like them. He could have wept
in his longings.
He searched about in his mind for an adequate malediction
for the indefinite cause, the thing upon which men turn
the words of final blame. It—whatever it was—was responsible
for him, he said. There lay the fault.
The haste of the column to reach the battle seemed to the
forlorn young man to be something much finer than stout
fighting. Heroes, he thought, could find excuses in that long
seething lane. They could retire with perfect self-respect and
make excuses to the stars.
He wondered what those men had eaten that they could
be in such haste to force their way to grim chances of death.
As he watched his envy grew until he thought that he
wished to change lives with one of them. He would have
liked to have used a tremendous force, he said, throw off
himself and become a better. Swift pictures of himself, apart,
yet in himself, came to him—a blue desperate figure leading
lurid charges with one knee forward and a broken blade
high—a blue, determined figure standing before a crimson
and steel assault, getting calmly killed on a high place before
the eyes of all. He thought of the magnificent pathos of his
dead body.
These thoughts uplifted him. He felt the quiver of war
desire. In his ears, he heard the ring of victory. He knew the
frenzy of a rapid successful charge. The music of the trampling
feet, the sharp voices, the clanking arms of the column
near him made him soar on the red wings of war. For a few
moments he was sublime.
He thought that he was about to start for the front.
Indeed, he saw a picture of himself, dust-stained, haggard,
panting, flying to the front at the proper moment to seize
and throttle the dark, leering witch of calamity.
Then the difficulties of the thing began to drag at him. He
hesitated, balancing awkwardly on one foot.
He had no rifle; he could not fight with his hands, said he
72 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
mal • e • dic • tion (ma lə dik´shən) n.,
curse
seeth • ing (se￣th´iŋ) adj., be in a state of
rapid agitated movement
pa • thos (pa￣´thôs) n., element in experience
or in artistic representation evoking
pity or compassion
hag • gard (ha´gərd) adj., having a worn
or emaciated appearance
_ How does the
youth feel about
himself in
comparison to the
men marching
toward battle?
_ How does the
youth like to picture
himself? What type
of soldier would he
like to be?
resentfully to his plan. Well, rifles could be had for the picking.
They were extraordinarily profuse.
Also, he continued, it would be a miracle if he found his
regiment. Well, he could fight with any regiment.
He started forward slowly. He stepped as if he expected to
tread upon some explosive thing. Doubts and he were struggling.
He would truly be a worm if any of his comrades should
see him returning thus, the marks of his flight upon him.
There was a reply that the intent fighters did not care for
what happened rearward saving that no hostile bayonets2
appeared there. In the battle-blur his face would, in a way, be
hidden, like the face of a cowled3 man.
But then he said that his tireless fate would bring forth,
when the strife lulled for a moment, a man to ask of him an
explanation. In imagination he felt the scrutiny of his companions
as he painfully labored through some lies.
Eventually, his courage expended itself upon these objections.
The debates drained him of his fire.
He was not cast down by this defeat of his plan, for, upon
studying the affair carefully, he could not but admit that the
objections were very formidable.
Furthermore, various ailments had begun to cry out. In
their presence he could not persist in flying high with the
wings of war; they rendered it almost impossible for him to
see himself in a heroic light. He tumbled headlong.
He discovered that he had a scorching thirst. His face was
so dry and grimy that he thought he could feel his skin
crackle. Each bone of his body had an ache in it, and seemingly
threatened to break with each movement. His feet were
like two sores. Also, his body was calling for food. It was
more powerful than a direct hunger. There was a dull,
weight-like feeling in his stomach, and, when he tried to
walk, his head swayed and he tottered. He could not see with
distinctness. Small patches of green mist floated before his
vision.
While he had been tossed by many emotions, he had not
CHAPTER 11 73
2. bayonets. Steel blade attached to the end of a gun and used for hand-tohand
combat
3. cowled. Hooded
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
pro • fuse (prə fyo—_os_) adj., exhibiting great abundance
scru • ti • ny (skro—_o´tə ne￣) n., searching study, inquiry, or
inspection
_ What problems
might prevent the
youth from rejoining
battle? What
solutions does he find
to these problems?
_ According to the
youth, why might his
regiment not notice
that he ran from
battle?
_ What “objection”
to taking part in
battle again makes
the youth feel less
eager to do so?
_ Why does the
youth feel that he is
not physically able to
rejoin the battle?
been aware of ailments. Now they beset him and made
clamor. As he was at last compelled to pay attention to them,
his capacity for self-hate was multiplied. In despair, he
declared that he was not like those others. He now conceded
it to be impossible that he should ever become a hero. He
was a craven loon. Those pictures of glory were piteous
things. He groaned from his heart and went staggering off.
A certain mothlike quality within him kept him in the
vicinity of the battle. He had a great desire to see, and to get
news. He wished to know who was winning.
He told himself that, despite his unprecedented suffering,
he had never lost his greed for a victory, yet, he said, in a
half-apologetic manner to his conscience, he could not but
know that a defeat for the army this time might mean many
favorable things for him. The blows of the enemy would
splinter regiments into fragments. Thus, many men of
courage, he considered, would be obliged to desert the colors
and scurry like chickens. He would appear as one of them.
They would be sullen brothers in distress, and he could then
easily believe he had not run any farther or faster than they.
And if he himself could believe in his virtuous perfection, he
conceived that there would be small trouble in convincing
all others.
He said, as if in excuse for this hope, that previously the
army had encountered great defeats and in a few months
had shaken off all blood and tradition of them, emerging as
bright and valiant as a new one; thrusting out of sight the
memory of disaster, and appearing with the valor and confidence
of unconquered legions.4 The shrilling voices of the
people at home would pipe dismally for a time, but various
generals were usually compelled to listen to these ditties.5 He
of course felt no compunctions for proposing a general as a
sacrifice. He could not tell who the chosen for the barbs
might be, so he could center no direct sympathy upon him.
The people were afar and he did not conceive public opinion
to be accurate at long range. It was quite probable they
would hit the wrong man who, after he had recovered from
his amazement would perhaps spend the rest of his days in
74 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
4. legions. Large military forces; armies
5. ditties. Songs
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
be • set (bi set´) vi., set upon; attack
cra • ven (kra￣´vən) adj., lacking the least
bit of courage
loon (lo—_on) n., lout, idler, simpleton
com • punc • tion (kəm pəŋ(k)´shən) n.,
anxiety arising from awareness of guilt
barb (bärb) n., biting or pointedly critical
remark or comment
_ Why does the
youth stay near the
battle?
_ Why does the
youth begin to think
it might be a good
thing if his side loses
the battle?
writing replies to the songs of his alleged failure. It would be
very unfortunate, no doubt, but in this case a general was of
no consequence to the youth.
In a defeat there would be a roundabout vindication of
himself. He thought it would prove, in a manner, that he
had fled early because of his superior powers of perception.
A serious prophet upon predicting a flood should be the first
man to climb a tree. This would demonstrate that he was
indeed a seer.
A moral vindication was regarded by the youth as a very
important thing. Without salve, he could not, he thought,
wear the sore badge of his dishonor through life. With his
heart continually assuring him that he was despicable, he
could not exist without making it, through his actions,
apparent to all men.
If the army had gone gloriously on he would be lost. If the
din meant that now his army’s flags were tilted forward he
was a condemned wretch. He would be compelled to doom
himself to isolation. If the men were advancing, their indifferent
feet were trampling upon his chances for a successful
life.
As these thoughts went rapidly through his mind, he
turned upon them and tried to thrust them away. He
denounced himself as a villain. He said that he was the most
unutterably selfish man in existence. His mind pictured the
soldiers who would place their defiant bodies before the
spear of the yelling battle fiend, and as he saw their dripping
corpses on an imagined field, he said that he was their murderer.
Again he thought that he wished he was dead. He believed
that he envied a corpse. Thinking of the slain, he achieved a
great contempt for some of them, as if they were guilty for
thus becoming lifeless. They might have been killed by lucky
chances, he said, before they had had opportunities to flee or
before they had been really tested. Yet they would receive
laurels from tradition. He cried out bitterly that their crowns
were stolen and their robes of glorious memories were
shams. However, he still said that it was a great pity he was
not as they.
A defeat of the army had suggested itself to him as a
means of escape from the consequences of his fall. He con-
CHAPTER 11 75 WWords
For
Everyday
Use
salve (sav) n., healing or soothing influence
or instrument
de • spi • ca • ble (di spi´kə bəl) adj., so
worthless or obnoxious as to rouse moral
indignation
de • nounce (di naun(t)s´) vt., declare
publicly to be blameworthy or evil
lau • rel (lôr´əl) n., crown of laurel, or the
leaves of a plant; honor
sham (sham) n., cheap falseness
_ What does the
youth believe a
defeat will prove
about him?
_ Why does the
youth believe he
needs to be
“vindicated”?
_ What does the
youth realize about
his desire to see the
army lose? What
does he realize will
happen to many of
his fellow soldiers
should this come to
pass?
sidered, now, however, that it was useless to think of such a
possibility. His education had been that success for that
mighty blue machine was certain; that it would make victories
as a contrivance turns out buttons.6 He presently discarded
all his speculations in the other direction. He
returned to the creed of soldiers.
When he perceived again that it was not possible for the
army to be defeated, he tried to bethink him of a fine tale
which he could take back to his regiment, and with it turn
the expected shafts of derision.
But, as he mortally feared these shafts, it became impossible
for him to invent a tale he felt he could trust. He experimented
with many schemes, but threw them aside one by
one as flimsy. He was quick to see vulnerable places in them
all.
Furthermore, he was much afraid that some arrow of
scorn might lay him mentally low before he could raise his
protecting tale.
He imagined the whole regiment saying: “Where’s Henry
Fleming? He run, didn’t ’e? Oh, my!” He recalled various persons
who would be quite sure to leave him no peace about
it. They would doubtless question him with sneers, and
laugh at his stammering hesitation. In the next engagement
they would try to keep watch of him to discover when he
would run.
Wherever he went in camp, he would encounter insolent
and lingeringly cruel stares. As he imagined himself passing
near a crowd of comrades, he could hear some one say,
“There he goes!”
Then, as if the heads were moved by one muscle, all the
faces were turned toward him with wide, derisive grins. He
seemed to hear some one make a humorous remark in a low
tone. At it the others all crowed and cackled. He was a slang
phrase.
76 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
6. contrivance . . . buttons. Machine makes buttons
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
creed (kre￣d) n., set of fundamental beliefs; guiding principle
de • ri • sive (di r_￣´siv) adj., expressing or causing scorn or
mockery
_ What has the
youth been taught
about his side in the
war?
_ What plan of
action does the youth
form next?
_ What does the
youth imagine his
regiment will do
when he returns?
Chapter 12
The column that had butted stoutly at the obstacles in the
roadway was barely out of the youth’s sight before he saw
dark waves of men come sweeping out of the woods and
down through the fields. He knew at once that the steel fibers
had been washed from their hearts. They were bursting from
their coats and their equipments as from entanglements.
They charged down upon him like terrified buffaloes.1
Behind them blue smoke curled and clouded above the
treetops, and through the thickets he could sometimes see a
distant pink glare. The voices of the cannon were clamoring
in interminable chorus.
The youth was horror-stricken. He stared in agony and
amazement. He forgot that he was engaged in combating the
universe. He threw aside his mental pamphlets on the philosophy
of the retreated and rules for the guidance of the
damned.
The fight was lost. The dragons were coming with invincible
strides. The army, helpless in the matted thickets and
blinded by the overhanging night, was going to be swallowed.
War, the red animal, war, the blood-swollen god,
would have bloated fill.
Within him something bade to cry out. He had the
impulse to make a rallying speech, to sing a battle hymn, but
he could only get his tongue to call into the air: “Why—
why—what—what ’s th’ matter?”
Soon he was in the midst of them. They were leaping and
scampering all about him. Their blanched faces shone in the
dusk. They seemed, for the most part, to be very burly men.
The youth turned from one to another of them as they galloped
along. His incoherent questions were lost. They were
heedless of his appeals. They did not seem to see him.
They sometimes gabbled insanely. One huge man was asking
of the sky: “Say, where de plank road? Where de plank
road!” It was as if he had lost a child. He wept in his pain and
dismay.
CHAPTER 12 77
1. buffaloes. Large horned animals that once roamed western states in large
herds; when frightened they would stampede in a group
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
in • vin • ci • ble (in vin(t)´sə bəl) adj.,
incapable of being conquered, overcome,
or subdued
ral • ly • ing (ra´le￣ iŋ) adj., arousing for
action
heed • less (he￣d´ləs) adj., inconsiderate,
thoughtless
gab • ble (ga´bəl) vt., say with incoherent
rapidity; babble
_ What happens to
the group of men
who had been sent
forward to fight the
enemy?
_ What does the
youth think about
the way the battle is
going for his side
now?
_ What does the
youth feel like doing?
What does he ask the
retreating soldiers?
Presently, men were running hither and thither in all
ways. The artillery booming, forward, rearward, and on the
flanks made jumble of ideas of direction. Landmarks had
vanished into the gathered gloom. The youth began to imagine
that he had got into the center of the tremendous quarrel,
and he could perceive no way out of it. From the mouths
of the fleeing men came a thousand wild questions, but no
one made answers.
The youth, after rushing about and throwing interrogations
at the heedless bands of retreating infantry, finally
clutched a man by the arm. They swung around face to face.
“Why—why—” stammered the youth struggling with his
balking tongue.
The man screamed: “Let go me! Let go me!” His face was
livid and his eyes were rolling uncontrolled. He was heaving
and panting. He still grasped his rifle, perhaps having forgotten
to release his hold upon it. He tugged frantically, and
the youth being compelled to lean forward was dragged several
paces.
“Let go me! Let go me!”
“Why—why—” stuttered the youth.
“Well, then!” bawled the man in a lurid rage. He adroitly
and fiercely swung his rifle. It crushed upon the youth’s
head. The man ran on.
The youth’s fingers had turned to paste upon the other’s
arm. The energy was smitten from his muscles. He saw the
flaming wings of lightning flash before his vision. There was
a deafening rumble of thunder within his head.
Suddenly his legs seemed to die. He sank writhing to the
ground. He tried to arise. In his efforts against the numbing
pain he was like a man wrestling with a creature of the air.
There was a sinister struggle.
Sometimes he would achieve a position half erect, battle
with the air for a moment, and then fall again, grabbing at
the grass. His face was of a clammy pallor. Deep groans were
wrenched from him.
At last, with a twisting movement, he got upon his hands
and knees, and from thence, like a babe trying to walk, to his
feet. Pressing his hands to his temples he went lurching over
the grass.
He fought an intense battle with his body. His dulled
78 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
liv • id (li´vəd) adj., ashen, pale
lu • rid (lur´əd) adj., wan and ghastly pale
in appearance
adroit • ly (ə drôit´le￣) adv., skillfully, dexterously
sin • is • ter (si´nəs tər) adj., accompanied
by or leading to disaster
pal • lor (pa´lər) n., deficiency of color
especially of the face
_ Why does the
youth stop one
soldier? What do you
think the youth
wishes to ask? What
is the soldier’s
reaction?
_ What does the
soldier do when the
youth won’t let go of
him?
_ What happens to
the youth after
having been struck?
What is he unable to
do?
senses wished him to swoon and he opposed them stubbornly,
his mind portraying unknown dangers and mutilations
if he should fall upon the field. He went tall soldier
fashion. He imagined secluded spots where he could fall and
be unmolested. To search for one he strove against the tide
of his pain.
Once he put his hand to the top of his head and timidly
touched the wound. The scratching pain of the contact made
him draw a long breath through his clinched teeth. His fingers
were dabbled with blood. He regarded them with a fixed stare.
Around him he could hear the grumble of jolted cannon
as the scurrying horses were lashed toward the front. Once,
a young officer on a besplashed charger nearly ran him
down. He turned and watched the mass of guns, men, and
horses sweeping in a wide curve toward a gap in a fence. The
officer was making excited motions with a gauntleted2 hand.
The guns followed the teams with an air of unwillingness, of
being dragged by the heels.
Some officers of the scattered infantry were cursing and
railing like fishwives.3 Their scolding voices could be heard
above the din. Into the unspeakable jumble in the roadway
rode a squadron4 of cavalry. The faded yellow of their facings
shone bravely. There was a mighty altercation.
The artillery were assembling as if for a conference.
The blue haze of evening was upon the field. The lines of
forest were long purple shadows. One cloud lay along the
western sky partly smothering the red.
As the youth left the scene behind him, he heard the guns
suddenly roar out. He imagined them shaking in black rage.
They belched and howled like brass devils guarding a gate.
The soft air was filled with the tremendous remonstrance.
With it came the shattering peal of opposing infantry.
Turning to look behind him, he could see sheets of orange
light illumine the shadowy distance. There were subtle and
sudden lightnings in the far air. At times he thought he
could see heaving masses of men.
He hurried on in the dark. The day had faded until he
CHAPTER 12 79
2. gauntleted. Wearing a gauntlet, or a protective glove
3. fishwives. Women who sell fish, sometimes negatively characterized as vulgar
and abusive
4. squadron. Unit of cavalry or horsemen
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
rail (ra￣l) vi., scold in harsh, insolent, or
abusive language
al • ter • ca • tion (äl tər ka￣´shən) n.,
noisy heated angry quarrel
re • mon • strance (ri mən(t)´strən(t)s)
n., earnest presentation of reasons for
opposition or protest
_ Whom is the
youth imitating?
What does he wish to
find?
_ What happens
when the youth tries
to determine how
serious his wound is?
could barely distinguish place for his feet. The purple darkness
was filled with men who lectured and jabbered.
Sometimes he could see them gesticulating against the blue
and somber sky. There seemed to be a great ruck5 of men and
munitions spread about in the forest and in the fields.
The little narrow roadway now lay lifeless. There were
overturned wagons like sun-dried bowlders.6 The bed of the
former torrent was choked with the bodies of horses and
splintered parts of war machines.
It had come to pass that his wound pained him but little.
He was afraid to move rapidly, however, for a dread of disturbing
it. He held his head very still and took many precautions
against stumbling. He was filled with anxiety, and
his face was pinched and drawn in anticipation of the pain
of any sudden mistake of his feet in the gloom.
His thoughts, as he walked, fixed intently upon his hurt.
There was a cool, liquid feeling about it and he imagined
blood moving slowly down under his hair. His head seemed
swollen to a size that made him think his neck to be inadequate.
The new silence of his wound made much worriment. The
little blistering voices of pain that had called out from his
scalp were, he thought, definite in their expression of danger.
By them he believed that he could measure his plight. But
when they remained ominously silent he became frightened
and imagined terrible fingers that clutched into his brain.
Amid it he began to reflect upon various incidents and
conditions of the past. He bethought him of certain meals
his mother had cooked at home, in which those dishes of
which he was particularly fond had occupied prominent
positions. He saw the spread table. The pine walls of the
kitchen were glowing in the warm light from the stove. Too,
he remembered how he and his companions used to go from
the schoolhouse to the bank of a shaded pool. He saw his
clothes in disorderly array upon the grass of the bank. He felt
the swash of the fragrant water upon his body. The leaves of
the overhanging maple rustled with melody in the wind of
youthful summer.
80 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
5. ruck. Jumble or gathering
6. bowlders. Boulders or mass of rock
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
jab • ber (ja´bər) vi., talk rapidly, indistinctly,
or unintelligibly
ges • tic • u • late (je sti´kyo—_o la￣t) vi.,
make gestures especially when speaking
drawn (drôn) adj., showing the effects of
tension, pain, or illness
om • i • nous • ly (ə´mə nəs le￣) adv., in a
manner that threatens evil
_ After some time,
how does the youth’s
wound feel? What is
he careful to do?
_ How does this
change in the wound
make the youth feel
about his injury?
_ What times in his
life does the youth
think back on?
He was overcome presently by a dragging weariness. His
head hung forward and his shoulders were stooped as if he
were bearing a great bundle. His feet shuffled along the
ground.
He held continuous arguments as to whether he should lie
down and sleep at some near spot, or force himself on until
he reached a certain haven. He often tried to dismiss the
question, but his body persisted in rebellion and his senses
nagged at him like pampered babies.
At last he heard a cheery voice near his shoulder: “Yeh
seem t’ be in a pretty bad way, boy?”
The youth did not look up, but he assented with thick
tongue. “Uh!”
The owner of the cheery voice took him firmly by the arm.
“Well,” he said, with a round laugh, “I’m goin’ your way. Th’
hull gang is goin’ your way. An’ I guess I kin give yeh a lift.”
They began to walk like a drunken man and his friend.
As they went along, the man questioned the youth and
assisted him with the replies like one manipulating the mind
of a child. Sometimes he interjected anecdotes. “What reg’-
ment do yeh b’long teh? Eh? What’s that? Th’ 304th N’ York?
Why, what corps is that in? Oh, it is? Why, I thought they
wasn’t engaged t’-day—they’re ’way over in th’ center. Oh,
they was, eh? Well, pretty nearly everybody got their share ’a
fightin’ t’-day. By dad, I give myself up fer dead any number
’a times. There was shootin’ here an’ shootin’ there, an’ hollerin’
here an’ hollerin’ there, in th’ damn’ darkness, until I
couldn’t tell t’ save m’ soul which side I was on. Sometimes
I thought I was sure ’nough from Ohier,7 an’ other times I
could ’a swore I was from th’ bitter end of Florida. It was th’
most mixed up dern thing I ever see. An’ these here hull
woods is a reg’lar mess. It’ll be a miracle if we find our reg’-
ments t’-night. Pretty soon, though, we’ll meet a-plenty of
guards an’ provost-guards,8 an’ one thing an’ another. Ho!
there they go with an off’cer, I guess. Look at his hand adraggin’.
He’s got all th’ war he wants, I bet. He won’t be
talkin’ so big about his reputation an’ all when they go t’
sawin’ off his leg. Poor feller! My brother’s got whiskers jest
CHAPTER 12 81
7. Ohier. Ohio
8. provost-guards. Police detail of soldiers
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
ha • ven (ha￣´vən) n., place of safety
ma • nip • u • late (mə ni´pyo—_o la￣t) vt.,
control or play upon by artful or unfair
means especially to one’s own advantage
an • ec • dote (a´nik do￣t) n., short
account of an interesting, amusing, or
biographical incident
_ What is the youth
debating?
_ What does one
soldier with a
“cheery voice” do for
the youth?
like that. How did yeh git ’way over here, anyhow? Your reg’-
ment is a long way from here, ain’t it? Well, I guess we can
find it. Yeh know there was a boy killed in my comp’ny t’-
day that I thought th’ world an’ all of. Jack was a nice feller.
By ginger, it hurt like thunder t’ see ol’ Jack jest git knocked
flat. We was a-standin’ purty9 peaceable fer a spell, ’though
there was men runnin’ ev’ry way all ’round us, an’ while we
was a-standin’ like that, ’long come a big fat feller. He began
t’ peck at Jack’s elbow, an’ he ses: ‘Say, where’s th’ road t’ th’
river?’ An’ Jack, he never paid no attention, an’ th’ feller kept
on a-peckin’ at his elbow an’ sayin’: ‘Say, where’s th’ road t’
th’ river?’ Jack was a-lookin’ ahead all th’ time tryin’ t’ see th’
Johnnies comin’ through th’ woods, an’ he never paid no
attention t’ this big fat feller fer a long time, but at last he
turned ’round an’ he ses: ‘Ah, go t’ hell an’ find th’ road t’ th’
river!’ An’ jest then a shot slapped him bang on th’ side th’
head. He was a sergeant, too. Them was his last words.
Thunder, I wish we was sure ’a findin’ our reg’ments t’-night.
It’s goin’ t’ be long huntin’. But I guess we kin do it.”
In the search which followed, the man of the cheery voice
seemed to the youth to possess a wand of a magic kind. He
threaded the mazes of the tangled forest with a strange fortune.
In encounters with guards and patrols he displayed the
keenness of a detective and the valor of a gamin.10 Obstacles
fell before him and became of assistance. The youth, with his
chin still on his breast, stood woodenly by while his companion
beat ways and means out of sullen things.
The forest seemed a vast hive of men buzzing about in
frantic circles, but the cheery man conducted the youth
without mistakes, until at last he began to chuckle with glee
and self-satisfaction. “Ah, there yeh are! See that fire?”
The youth nodded stupidly.
“Well, there’s where your reg’ment is. An’ now, good-by,
ol’ boy, good luck t’ yeh.”
A warm and strong hand clasped the youth’s languid fingers
for an instant, and then he heard a cheerful and audacious
whistling as the man strode away. As he who had so
befriended him was thus passing out of his life, it suddenly
occurred to the youth that he had not once seen his face.
82 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
9. purty. Pretty
10. gamin. Boy who hangs around on the streets WWords
For
Everyday
Use
wood • en • ly (wu´d_n le￣) adv., in an awkwardly stiff manner
lan • guid (laŋ´gwəd) adj., drooping or flagging from or as if
from exhaustion; weak
_ What seems
magical to the youth
about the soldier
with the cheery
voice?
_ Where does the
soldier successfully
lead the youth?
_ What does the
youth realize about
the man who has
helped him?
Chapter 13
The youth went slowly toward the fire indicated by his
departed friend. As he reeled, he bethought him of the welcome
his comrades would give him. He had a conviction
that he would soon feel in his sore heart the barbed missiles
of ridicule. He had no strength to invent a tale; he would be
a soft target.
He made vague plans to go off into the deeper darkness
and hide, but they were all destroyed by the voices of
exhaustion and pain from his body. His ailments, clamoring,
forced him to seek the place of food and rest, at whatever
cost.
He swung unsteadily toward the fire. He could see the
forms of men throwing black shadows in the red light, and
as he went nearer it became known to him in some way that
the ground was strewn with sleeping men.
Of a sudden he confronted a black and monstrous figure.
A rifle barrel1 caught some glinting beams. “Halt! halt!” He
was dismayed for a moment, but he presently thought that
he recognized the nervous voice. As he stood tottering before
the rifle barrel, he called out: “Why, hello, Wilson, you—you
here?”
The rifle was lowered to a position of caution and the loud
soldier came slowly forward. He peered into the youth’s face.
“That you, Henry?”
“Yes, it’s—it’s me.”
“Well, well, ol’ boy,” said the other, “by ginger, I’m glad t’
see yeh! I give yeh up fer a goner. I thought yeh was dead
sure enough.” There was husky emotion in his voice.
The youth found that now he could barely stand upon his
feet. There was a sudden sinking of his forces. He thought he
must hasten to produce his tale to protect him from the missiles
already at the lips of his redoubtable comrades.
So, staggering before the loud soldier, he began: “Yes, yes.
I’ve—I’ve had an awful time. I’ve been all over. Way over on
th’ right. Ter’ble fightin’ over there. I had an awful time. I got
separated from th’ reg’ment. Over on th’ right, I got shot. In
CHAPTER 13 83
1. rifle barrel. The tube of a gun that discharges
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
reel (re￣l) vi., waver; walk or move unsteadily
ail • ment (a￣l´mənt) n., bodily disorder or
chronic disease
glint • ing (glint´iŋ) adj., reflecting in brilliant
flashes; gleaming
dis • may (dis ma￣´) vt., deprive of courage
or resolution through fear or anxiety
re • doubt • able (ri dau´tə bəl) adj., illustrious;
worthy of respect
_ What does the
youth plan to do?
Why doesn’t he go
do this?
_ Whom does the
youth encounter
outside his regiment’s
camp?
_ What did Wilson
think had happened
to Henry, the youth?
_ What does Henry
say has happened to
him? How does he
say he was injured?
th’ head. I never see sech fightin’. Awful time. I don’t see
how I could a’ got separated from th’ reg’ment. I got shot,
too.”
His friend had stepped forward quickly. “What? Got shot?
Why didn’t yeh say so first? Poor ol’ boy, we must—hol’ on
a minnit; what am I doin’. I’ll call Simpson.”
Another figure at that moment loomed in the gloom.
They could see that it was the corporal. “Who yeh talkin’ to,
Wilson?” he demanded. His voice was anger-toned. “Who
yeh talkin’ to? Yeh th’ derndest sentinel2—why—hello,
Henry, you here? Why, I thought you was dead four hours
ago! Great Jerusalem, they keep turnin’ up every ten minutes
or so! We thought we’d lost forty-two men by straight count,
but if they keep on a-comin’ this way, we’ll git th’ comp’ny
all back by mornin’ yit. Where was yeh?”
“Over on th’ right. I got separated”—began the youth
with considerable glibness.
But his friend had interrupted hastily. “Yes, an’ he got
shot in th’ head an’ he’s in a fix, an’ we must see t’ him right
away.” He rested his rifle in the hollow of his left arm and his
right around the youth’s shoulder.
“Gee, it must hurt like thunder!” he said.
The youth leaned heavily upon his friend. “Yes, it hurts—
hurts a good deal,” he replied. There was a faltering in his
voice.
“Oh,” said the corporal. He linked his arm in the youth’s
and drew him forward. “Come on, Henry. I’ll take keer ’a
yeh.”
As they went on together the loud private called out after
them: “Put ’im t’ sleep in my blanket, Simpson. An’—hol’ on
a minnit—here’s my canteen. It’s full ’a coffee. Look at his
head by th’ fire an’ see how it looks. Maybe it’s a pretty bad
un. When I git relieved in a couple ’a minnits, I’ll be over an’
see t’ him.”
The youth’s senses were so deadened that his friend’s
voice sounded from afar and he could scarcely feel the pressure
of the corporal’s arm. He submitted passively to the latter’s
directing strength. His head was in the old manner
hanging forward upon his breast. His knees wobbled.
84 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
2. sentinel. Soldier standing guard
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
glib • ness (glib´nəs) n., ease and fluency
in speaking or writing often to the point
of being insincere or deceitful
fal • ter • ing (fôl´tər iŋ) n., weak or broken
stammer or hesitation
pas • sive • ly (pa´siv le￣) adv., in a manner
that lacks energy or will
_ How many men
did the corporal think
had been killed?
What do these men
he believed were
dead keep doing?
_ What does Wilson
do when Henry
begins to explain
why he disappeared
for a while?
_ What does Wilson
tell the corporal to
do?
The corporal led him into the glare of the fire. “Now,
Henry,” he said, “let’s have look at yer ol’ head.”
The youth sat down obediently and the corporal, laying
aside his rifle, began to fumble in the bushy hair of his comrade.
He was obliged to turn the other’s head so that the full
flush of the fire light would beam upon it. He puckered his
mouth with a critical air. He drew back his lips and whistled
through his teeth when his fingers came in contact with the
splashed blood and the rare3 wound.
“Ah, here we are!” he said. He awkwardly made further
investigations. “Jest as I thought,” he added, presently.
“Yeh’ve been grazed by a ball. It’s raised a queer lump jest as
if some feller had lammed4 yeh on th’ head with a club. It
stopped a-bleedin’ long time ago. Th’ most about it is that in
th’ mornin’ yeh’ll feel that a number ten hat wouldn’t fit
yeh. An’ your head’ll be all het up an’ feel as dry as burnt
pork. An’ yeh may git a lot ’a other sicknesses, too, by
mornin’. Yeh can’t never tell. Still, I don’t much think so. It’s
jest a damn’ good belt on th’ head, an’ nothin’ more. Now,
you jest sit here an’ don’t move, while I go rout out th’ relief.
Then I’ll send Wilson t’ take keer ’a yeh.”
The corporal went away. The youth remained on the
ground like a parcel. He stared with a vacant look into the
fire.
After a time he aroused, for some part, and the things
about him began to take form. He saw that the ground in the
deep shadows was cluttered with men, sprawling in every
conceivable posture. Glancing narrowly into the more distant
darkness, he caught occasional glimpses of visages that
loomed pallid and ghostly, lit with a phosphorescent glow.
These faces expressed in their lines the deep stupor of the
tired soldiers. They made them appear like men drunk with
wine. This bit of forest might have appeared to an ethereal
wanderer as a scene of the result of some frightful debauch.
On the other side of the fire the youth observed an officer
asleep, seated bolt upright, with his back against a tree. There
was something perilous in his position. Badgered by dreams,
perhaps, he swayed with little bounces and starts, like an old
CHAPTER 13 85
3. rare. Red, like rare cooked meat
4. lammed. Beat soundly
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
vis • age (vi´zij) n., face, countenance, or
appearance of a person
stu • por (sto—_o´pər) n., state of extreme
dullness or inactivity resulting often from
stress or shock
ethe • re • al (e thir´e￣ əl) adj., of or relating
to the regions beyond the earth
de • bauch (di bôch´) n., corrupt activity
per • il • ous (per´ə ləs) adj., dangerous
_ According to the
corporal, what must
have happened to
Henry’s head? What
does the corporal say
the injury looks like?
_ According to the
corporal, how serious
is Henry’s wound?
_ What does the
youth see all around
the camp?
_ In what position
has one officer fallen
asleep?
toddy-stricken5 grandfather in a chimney corner. Dust and
stains were upon his face. His lower jaw hung down as if
lacking strength to assume its normal position. He was the
picture of an exhausted soldier after a feast of war.
He had evidently gone to sleep with his sword in his arms.
These two had slumbered in an embrace, but the weapon
had been allowed in time to fall unheeded to the ground.
The brass-mounted hilt lay in contact with some parts of the
fire.
Within the gleam of rose and orange light from the burning
sticks were other soldiers, snoring and heaving, or lying
deathlike in slumber. A few pairs of legs were stuck forth,
rigid and straight. The shoes displayed the mud or dust of
marches and bits of rounded trousers, protruding from the
blankets, showed rents and tears from hurried pitchings
through the dense brambles.
The fire crackled musically. From it swelled light smoke.
Overhead the foliage moved softly. The leaves, with their
faces turned toward the blaze, were colored shifting hues of
silver, often edged with red. Far off to the right, through a
window in the forest could be seen a handful of stars lying,
like glittering pebbles, on the black level of the night.
Occasionally, in this low-arched hall, a soldier would
arouse and turn his body to a new position, the experience
of his sleep having taught him of uneven and objectionable
places upon the ground under him. Or, perhaps, he would
lift himself to a sitting posture, blink at the fire for an unintelligent
moment, throw a swift glance at his prostrate companion,
and then cuddle down again with a grunt of sleepy
content.
The youth sat in a forlorn heap until his friend the loud
young soldier came, swinging two canteens by their light
strings. “Well, now, Henry, ol’ boy,” said the latter, “we’ll
have yeh fixed up in jest about a minnit.”
He had the bustling ways of an amateur nurse. He fussed
around the fire and stirred the sticks to brilliant exertions. He
made his patient drink largely from the canteen that contained
the coffee. It was to the youth a delicious draught.6 He
86 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
5. toddy-stricken. Drunken
6. draught. Draft, or drink
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
heave (he￣v) vi., rise and fall rhythmically
pros • trate (prô´stra￣t) adj., completely
overcome and lacking vitality, will, or
power to rise
ex • er • tion (eg zər´shən) n., laborious
or perceptible effort
_ What does Wilson,
the loud soldier, do
for Henry?
tilted his head afar back and held the canteen long to his
lips. The cool mixture went caressingly down his blistered
throat. Having finished, he sighed with comfortable delight.
The loud young soldier watched his comrade with an air
of satisfaction. He later produced an extensive handkerchief
from his pocket. He folded it into a manner of bandage and
soused water from the other canteen upon the middle of it.
This crude arrangement he bound over the youth’s head,
tying the ends in a queer knot at the back of the neck.
“There,” he said, moving off and surveying his deed, “yeh
look like th’ devil, but I bet yeh feel better.”
The youth contemplated his friend with grateful eyes.
Upon his aching and swelling head the cold cloth was like a
tender woman’s hand.
“Yeh don’t holler ner say nothin’,” remarked his friend
approvingly. “I know I’m a blacksmith at takin’ keer ’a sick
folks7, an’ yeh never squeaked. Yer a good un, Henry. Most ’a
men would a’ been in th’ hospital long ago. A shot in th’
head ain’t foolin’ business.”
The youth made no reply, but began to fumble with the
buttons of his jacket.
“Well, come, now,” continued his friend, “come on. I
must put yeh t’ bed an’ see that yeh git a good night’s rest.”
The other got carefully erect, and the loud young soldier
led him among the sleeping forms lying in groups and rows.
Presently he stooped and picked up his blankets. He spread
the rubber one upon the ground and placed the woolen one
about the youth’s shoulders.
“There now,” he said, “lie down an’ git some sleep.”
The youth, with his manner of doglike obedience, got
carefully down like a crone stooping. He stretched out with
a murmur of relief and comfort. The ground felt like the softest
couch.
But of a sudden he ejaculated: “Hol’ on a minnit! Where
you goin’ t’ sleep?”
His friend waved his hand impatiently. “Right down there
by yeh.”
“Well, but hol’ on a minnit,” continued the youth. “What
yeh goin’ t’ sleep in? I’ve got your—”
CHAPTER 13 87
7. blacksmith . . . sick folks. Not gentle and skilled at taking care of sick people
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
souse (sous) vt., plunge in liquid; immerse
crone (kro￣n) n., withered old woman
_ What does Wilson
say he admires about
Henry?
_ What does the
youth realize as soon
as he lies down in
Wilson’s blankets?
The loud young soldier snarled: “Shet up an’ go on t’
sleep. Don’t be makin’ a damn’ fool ’a yerself,” he said
severely.
After the reproof the youth said no more. An exquisite
drowsiness had spread through him. The warm comfort of
the blanket enveloped him and made a gentle languor. His
head fell forward on his crooked arm and his weighted lids
went softly down over his eyes. Hearing a splatter of musketry
from the distance, he wondered indifferently if those
men sometimes slept. He gave a long sigh, snuggled down
into his blanket, and in a moment was like his comrades.
88 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
re • proof (ri pro—_of) n., criticism for a fault
lan • guor (laŋ´gər) n., weakness or weariness of body or
mind
Chapter 14
When the youth awoke it seemed to him that he had
been asleep for a thousand years, and he felt sure that he
opened his eyes upon an unexpected world. Gray mists were
slowly shifting before the first efforts of the sun rays. An
impending splendor could be seen in the eastern sky. An icy
dew had chilled his face, and immediately upon arousing he
curled farther down into his blanket. He stared for a while
at the leaves overhead, moving in a heraldic wind of the
day.
The distance was splintering and blaring with the noise of
fighting. There was in the sound an expression of a deadly
persistency, as if it had not begun and was not to cease.
About him were the rows and groups of men that he had
dimly seen the previous night. They were getting a last
draught of sleep before the awakening. The gaunt, careworn
features and dusty figures were made plain by this quaint
light at the dawning, but it dressed the skin of the men in
corpselike hues and made the tangled limbs appear pulseless
and dead. The youth started up with a little cry when his
eyes first swept over this motionless mass of men, thickspread
upon the ground, pallid, and in strange postures. His
disordered mind interpreted the hall of the forest as a charnel
place.1 He believed for an instant that he was in the
house of the dead, and he did not dare to move lest these
corpses start up, squalling and squawking. In a second, however,
he achieved his proper mind. He swore a complicated
oath at himself. He saw that this somber picture was not a
fact of the present, but a mere prophecy.
He heard then the noise of a fire crackling briskly in the
cold air, and, turning his head, he saw his friend pottering
busily about a small blaze. A few other figures moved in the
fog, and he heard the hard cracking of axe blows.
Suddenly there was a hollow rumble of drums. A distant
bugle sang faintly. Similar sounds, varying in strength, came
from near and far over the forest. The bugles called to each
CHAPTER 14 89
1. charnel place. Building or chamber in which bodies or bones are placed
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
im • pend • ing (im pend´iŋ) adj., about to
occur
he • ral • dic (he ral´dik) adj., of or relating
to a bearer of news
gaunt (gônt) adj., excessively thin and
angular
mere (me￣r) adj., being nothing more than
_ What sounds does
the youth hear upon
awaking?
_ In what way do
the sleeping men
appear to the youth?
other like brazen gamecocks.2 The near thunder of the regimental
drums rolled.
The body of men in the woods rustled. There was a general
uplifting of heads. A murmuring of voices broke upon the air.
In it there was much bass3 of grumbling oaths. Strange gods
were addressed in condemnation of the early hours necessary
to correct war. An officer’s peremptory tenor4 rang out and
quickened the stiffened movement of the men. The tangled
limbs unraveled. The corpse-hued faces were hidden behind
fists that twisted slowly in the eye sockets.
The youth sat up and gave vent to an enormous yawn.
“Thunder!” he remarked petulantly. He rubbed his eyes, and
then putting up his hand felt carefully of the bandage over
his wound. His friend, perceiving him to be awake, came
from the fire. “Well, Henry, ol’ man, how do yeh feel this
mornin’?” he demanded.
The youth yawned again. Then he puckered his mouth to
a little pucker. His head, in truth, felt precisely like a melon,
and there was an unpleasant sensation at his stomach.
“Oh, Lord, I feel pretty bad,” he said.
“Thunder!” exclaimed the other. “I hoped ye’d feel all
right this mornin’. Let’s see th’ bandage—I guess it’s
slipped.” He began to tinker at the wound in rather a clumsy
way until the youth exploded.
“Gosh-dern it!” he said in sharp irritation; “you’re the
hangdest man I ever saw! You wear muffs5 on your hands.
Why in good thunderation can’t you be more easy? I’d
rather you’d stand off an’ throw guns at it. Now, go slow, an’
don’t act as if you was nailing down carpet.”
He glared with insolent command at his friend, but the
latter answered soothingly. “Well, well, come now, an’ git
some grub,” he said. “Then, maybe, yeh’ll feel better.”
At the fireside the loud young soldier watched over his
comrade’s wants with tenderness and care. He was very busy
marshaling the little black vagabonds6 of tin cups and pour-
90 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
2. gamecocks. Rooster trained for fighting
3. bass. Deep or low tones
4. tenor. High-pitched male voice
5. muffs. Warm tubular coverings for the hands
6. vagabonds. Things or people that wander; refers to the way the cups are
passed about
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
bra • zen (bra￣´z_n) adj., marked by contemptuous boldness
pet • u • lant • ly (pe´chə lənt le￣) adv., characterized by
temporary ill humor
marshal (märsh´əl) vt., place in proper rank or position
_ How does the
youth’s injury make
him feel?
_ What is the
youth’s response
when Wilson tries to
help him? What is
Wilson’s reaction to
the youth’s harsh
words?
_ How does the loud
soldier, Wilson, treat
his injured friend at
breakfast?
ing into them the streaming, iron-colored mixture from a
small and sooty tin pail. He had some fresh meat, which he
roasted hurriedly upon a stick. He sat down then and contemplated
the youth’s appetite with glee.
The youth took note of a remarkable change in his comrade
since those days of camp life upon the river bank. He
seemed no more to be continually regarding the proportions
of his personal prowess. He was not furious at small words
that pricked his conceits. He was no more a loud young soldier.
There was about him now a fine reliance. He showed a
quiet belief in his purposes and his abilities. And this inward
confidence evidently enabled him to be indifferent to little
words of other men aimed at him.
The youth reflected. He had been used to regarding his
comrade as a blatant child with an audacity grown from his
inexperience, thoughtless, headstrong, jealous, and filled
with a tinsel7 courage. A swaggering babe accustomed to
strut in his own dooryard. The youth wondered where had
been born these new eyes; when his comrade had made the
great discovery that there were many men who would refuse
to be subjected by him. Apparently, the other had now
climbed a peak of wisdom from which he could perceive
himself as a very wee thing. And the youth saw that ever
after it would be easier to live in his friend’s neighborhood.
His comrade balanced his ebony coffee-cup on his knee.
“Well, Henry,” he said, “what d’yeh think th’ chances are?
D’yeh think we’ll wallop ’em?”
The youth considered for a moment. “Day-b’fore-yesterday,”
he finally replied, with boldness, “you would ’a’ bet
you’d lick the hull kit-an’-boodle all by yourself.”
His friend looked a trifle amazed. “Would I?” he asked. He
pondered. “Well, perhaps I would,” he decided at last. He
stared humbly at the fire.
The youth was quite disconcerted at this surprising reception
of his remarks. “Oh, no, you wouldn’t either,” he said,
hastily trying to retrace.
But the other made a deprecating gesture. “Oh, yeh needn’t
mind, Henry,” he said. “I believe I was a pretty big fool in
those days.” He spoke as after a lapse of years.
CHAPTER 14 91
7. tinsel. Superficial; false
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
con • ceit (kən se￣t´) n., fanciful idea
re • li • ance (ri l_￣´ən(t)s) n., confidence
bla • tant (bla´t_nt) adj., completely obvious,
conspicuous, or obtrusive especially
in a crass or offensive manner
sub • ject (səb jekt´) vt., bring under control
or dominion
dep • re • cat • ing (de´pri ka￣t iŋ) adj.,
playing down; making little of
_ What does the
youth notice about
his friend, the loud
soldier?
_ What did the
youth used to think
of the loud soldier’s
character?
_ What has the loud
soldier apparently
done? In what way
has he changed for
the better?
_ What does Henry
say Wilson would
have said two days
earlier? What does
Wilson say about the
way he was two days
earlier?
There was a little pause.
“All th’ officers say we’ve got th’ rebs8 in a pretty tight
box,” said the friend, clearing his throat in a commonplace
way. “They all seem t’ think we’ve got ’em jest where we
want ’em.”
“I don’t know about that,” the youth replied. “What I
seen over on th’ right makes me think it was th’ other way
about. From where I was, it looked as if we was gettin’ a good
poundin’ yestirday.”
“D’yeh think so?” inquired the friend. “I thought we handled
’em pretty rough yestirday.”
“Not a bit,” said the youth. “Why, lord, man, you didn’t
see nothing of the fight. Why!” Then a sudden thought came
to him. “Oh! Jim Conklin’s dead.”
His friend started. “What? Is he? Jim Conklin?”
The youth spoke slowly. “Yes. He’s dead. Shot in th’ side.”
“Yeh don’t say so. Jim Conklin. . . . poor cuss!”
All about them were other small fires surrounded by men
with their little black utensils. From one of these near came
sudden sharp voices in a row. It appeared that two lightfooted
soldiers had been teasing a huge, bearded man, causing
him to spill coffee upon his blue knees. The man had
gone into a rage and had sworn comprehensively. Stung by
his language, his tormentors had immediately bristled at
him with a great show of resenting unjust oaths. Possibly
there was going to be a fight.
The friend arose and went over to them, making pacific
motions with his arms. “Oh, here, now, boys, what’s th’
use?” he said. “We’ll be at th’ rebs in less’n an hour. What’s
th’ good fightin’ ’mong ourselves?”
One of the light-footed soldiers turned upon him redfaced
and violent. “Yeh needn’t come around here with yer
preachin’. I s’pose yeh don’t approve ’a fightin’ since Charley
Morgan licked yeh; but I don’t see what business this here is
’a yours or anybody else.”
“Well, it ain’t,” said the friend mildly. “Still I hate t’ see—”
There was a tangled argument.
“Well, he—,” said the two, indicating their opponent with
accusative forefingers.
92 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
8. rebs. Rebels, members of the Confederate forces
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
com • pre • hen • sive • ly (kôm pri
hen(t)´siv le￣) adv., completely or broadly
bris • tle (bri´səl) vi., take on an aggressive
attitude or appearance
pa • cif • ic (pə si´fik) adj., tending to
lessen conflict; peaceable
_ What does the
youth suddenly
remember to tell his
friend?
_ What does Wilson
tell the soldiers to
break up their
quarrel?
The huge soldier was quite purple with rage. He pointed
at the two soldiers with his great hand, extended clawlike.
“Well, they—”
But during this argumentative time the desire to deal
blows seemed to pass, although they said much to each
other. Finally the friend returned to his old seat. In a short
while the three antagonists could be seen together in an amiable
bunch.
“Jimmie Rogers ses I’ll have t’ fight him after th’ battle t’-
day,” announced the friend as he again seated himself. “He
ses he don’t allow no interferin’ in his business. I hate t’ see
th’ boys fightin’ ’mong themselves.”
The youth laughed. “Yer changed a good bit. Yeh ain’t at
all like yeh was. I remember when you an’ that Irish feller—”
He stopped and laughed again.
“No, I didn’t use t’ be that way,” said his friend thoughtfully.
“That’s true ’nough.”
“Well, I didn’t mean—” began the youth.
The friend made another deprecatory gesture. “Oh, yeh
needn’t mind, Henry.”
There was another little pause.
“Th’ reg’ment lost over half th’ men yestirday,” remarked
the friend eventually. “I thought a course they was all dead,
but, laws,9 they kep’ a-comin’ back last night until it seems,
after all, we didn’t lose but a few. They’d been scattered all
over, wanderin’ around in th’ woods, fightin’ with other reg’-
ments, an’ everything. Jest like you done.”
“So?” said the youth.
CHAPTER 14 93
9. Laws. Lord
_ What does Wilson
say happened to
many men in the
regiment yesterday?
Why do you think he
says this?
Chapter 15
The regiment was standing at order arms1 at the side of a
lane, waiting for the command to march, when suddenly the
youth remembered the little packet enwrapped in a faded
yellow envelope which the loud young soldier with lugubrious
words had intrusted to him. It made him start. He
uttered an exclamation and turned toward his comrade.
“Wilson!”
“What?”
His friend, at his side in the ranks, was thoughtfully staring
down the road. From some cause his expression was at
that moment very meek. The youth, regarding him with
sidelong glances, felt impelled to change his purpose. “Oh,
nothing,” he said.
His friend turned his head in some surprise, “Why, what
was yeh goin’ t’ say?”
“Oh, nothing,” repeated the youth.
He resolved not to deal the little blow. It was sufficient
that the fact made him glad. It was not necessary to knock
his friend on the head with the misguided packet.
He had been possessed of much fear of his friend, for he
saw how easily questionings could make holes in his feelings.
Lately, he had assured himself that the altered comrade
would not tantalize him with a persistent curiosity, but he
felt certain that during the first period of leisure his friend
would ask him to relate his adventures of the previous day.
He now rejoiced in the possession of a small weapon with
which he could prostrate his comrade at the first signs of a
cross-examination. He was master. It would now be he who
could laugh and shoot the shafts of derision.
The friend had, in a weak hour, spoken with sobs of his
own death. He had delivered a melancholy oration previous to
his funeral, and had doubtless in the packet of letters, presented
various keepsakes to relatives. But he had not died, and
thus he had delivered himself into the hands of the youth.
The latter felt immensely superior to his friend, but he
94 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
1. order arms. Position in which the rifle is held vertically beside the right leg
with the butt resting on the ground
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
lu • gu • bri • ous (lu go—_o´bre￣ əs) adj.,
exaggeratedly or affectedly mournful or sad
im • pel (im pel´) vt., force
tan • ta • lize (tan´t_l _￣z) vt., tease or torment
pros • trate (prô´stra￣t) vt., put in a humble
and submissive posture or state
o • ra • tion (ô ra´shən) n., elaborate, formal,
and dignified speech
_ What does the
youth suddenly
remember about
Wilson?
_ What does the
youth decide not to
do?
_ About what had
the youth been
concerned? Why isn’t
he as worried about
this now?
inclined to condescension. He adopted toward him an air of
patronizing good humor.
His self-pride was now entirely restored. In the shade of its
flourishing growth he stood with braced and self-confident
legs, and since nothing could now be discovered he did not
shrink from an encounter with the eyes of judges, and
allowed no thoughts of his own to keep him from an attitude
of manfulness. He had performed his mistakes in the dark, so
he was still a man.
Indeed, when he remembered his fortunes of yesterday,
and looked at them from a distance he began to see something
fine there. He had license to be pompous and veteranlike.
His panting agonies of the past he put out of his sight.
In the present, he declared to himself that it was only the
doomed and the damned who roared with sincerity at circumstance.
Few but they ever did it. A man with a full stomach
and the respect of his fellows had no business to scold
about anything that he might think to be wrong in the ways
of the universe, or even with the ways of society. Let the
unfortunates rail; the others may play marbles.
He did not give a great deal of thought to these battles
that lay directly before him. It was not essential that he
should plan his ways in regard to them. He had been taught
that many obligations of a life were easily avoided. The lessons
of yesterday had been that retribution was a laggard and
blind. With these facts before him he did not deem it necessary
that he should become feverish over the possibilities of
the ensuing twenty-four hours. He could leave much to
chance. Besides, a faith in himself had secretly blossomed.
There was a little flower of confidence growing within him.
He was now a man of experience. He had been out among
the dragons, he said, and he assured himself that they were
not so hideous as he had imagined them. Also, they were
inaccurate; they did not sting with precision. A stout heart
often defied, and defying, escaped.
And, furthermore, how could they kill him who was the
chosen of gods and doomed to greatness?
He remembered how some of the men had run from the
battle. As he recalled their terror-struck faces he felt a scorn
for them. They had surely been more fleet and more wild
CHAPTER 15 95 WWords
For
Everyday
Use
con • de • scen • sion (kən di sen(t)´shən)
n., voluntary descent from one’s rank or
dignity in relations with an inferior
pa • tron • iz • ing (pa￣´trə n_￣z iŋ) adj.,
treating haughtily or coolly
pomp • ous (pəm´pəs) adj., having or
exhibiting self-importance; arrogant
ret • ri • bu • tion (re trə byo—_o´shən) n.,
dispensing or receiving of reward or punishment
_ In the youth’s
mind, why is he still
“a man”?
_ How is the youth
beginning to feel
about what
happened yesterday?
_ What lessons did
the youth learn the
previous day?
_ For whom does
the youth feel scorn?
In what way does he
differentiate his
actions from theirs?
than was absolutely necessary. They were weak mortals. As
for himself, he had fled with discretion and dignity.
He was aroused from this reverie by his friend, who, having
hitched2 about nervously and blinked at the trees for a
time, suddenly coughed in an introductory way, and spoke.
“Fleming!”
“What?”
The friend put his hand up to his mouth and coughed
again. He fidgeted in his jacket.
“Well,” he gulped, at last, “I guess yeh might as well give
me back them letters.” Dark, prickling blood had flushed
into his cheeks and brow.
“All right, Wilson,” said the youth. He loosened two buttons
of his coat, thrust in his hand, and brought forth the
packet. As he extended it to his friend the latter’s face was
turned from him.
He had been slow in the act of producing the packet
because during it he had been trying to invent a remarkable
comment upon the affair. He could conjure nothing of sufficient
point. He was compelled to allow his friend to escape
unmolested with his packet. And for this he took unto himself
considerable credit. It was a generous thing.
His friend at his side seemed suffering great shame. As he
contemplated him, the youth felt his heart grow more strong
and stout. He had never been compelled to blush in such manner
for his acts; he was an individual of extraordinary virtues.
He reflected, with condescending pity: “Too bad! Too bad!
The poor devil, it makes him feel tough!”
After this incident, and as he reviewed the battle pictures
he had seen, he felt quite competent to return home and
make the hearts of the people glow with stories of war. He
could see himself in a room of warm tints telling tales to listeners.
He could exhibit laurels. They were insignificant; still,
in a district where laurels were infrequent, they might shine.
He saw his gaping audience picturing him as the central
figure in blazing scenes. And he imagined the consternation
and the ejaculations of his mother and the young lady at the
seminary as they drank his recitals. Their vague feminine formula
for beloved ones doing brave deeds on the field of battle
without risk of life would be destroyed.
96 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
2. hitched. Jerked WWords
For
Everyday
Use
dis • cre • tion (dis kre´shən) n., ability to
make responsible decisions
rev • er • ie (re´və re￣) n., daydream
con • ster • na • tion (kôn stər na￣´shən)
n., amazement or dismay that hinders or
throws into confusion
for • mu • la (fôr´myo—_o lə) n., conventionalized
statement intended to express
some fundamental truth or principle
_ What does Wilson
ask of the youth?
How does he feel
about asking this?
_ How does Wilson’s
shame make the
youth feel?
_ What does the
youth look forward to
doing one day?
Respond to the Selection
What is worse—being embarrassed in front of another person or suffering shame
privately?
Investigate, Inquire, and Imagine
CHAPTERS 11–15 97
Recall: GATHERING FACTS
1a. In Chapter 11, what does Henry
(the youth) see one calm and proud
regiment doing? What does Henry
wish would happen to his side in the
battle? In Chapter 12, what happens
to the calm and proud regiment
described in Chapter 11? Describe
the way in which Henry is injured in
Chapter 12.
2a. What are the effects of Henry’s
injuries on him physically? Who volunteers
to help Henry after he has
been injured? What powers does this
person seem to have to Henry?
Where does this person lead him?
3a. What actions does Wilson (the
loud soldier) perform for Henry once
he returns to the regiment? What
does Henry notice about Wilson?
What does Wilson say about the way
he acted this morning? What does
the author call Wilson now instead
of the “loud soldier”?
Analyze: TAKING THINGS APART
4a. Identify Henry’s attitude toward
his own position and what he perceives
to be his own dishonor. In
what way is Henry’s injury a stroke
of luck? What does it enable him to
do that he might find to be more
difficult if it were not for his injury?
Interpret: FINDING MEANING
1b. What emotions does the loss of
this particular battle create in Henry?
In the regiment that retreats?
Explain your reaction to how Henry
was injured. Were you surprised that
he was injured in this way? What
does the way Henry was injured
reveal about the effect that war and
panic can have on people?
2b. In what way is Henry’s position
now similar to the tattered man’s in
previous chapters? In what way is it
different? In what way do the actions
of the person who helps Henry now
compare with Henry’s previous
actions toward the tattered man?
3b. In what ways has Wilson
changed? When Wilson speaks of his
behavior that morning, he speaks of
“those days,” as if years have gone
by instead of hours. Why might this
day have had the effect of years passing?
What does this new name reveal
about the way Wilson has changed?
Synthesize: BRINGING THINGS TOGETHER
4b. Explain whether Henry has in
fact received a “red badge of
courage.” Think back to your
responses about what a red badge
of courage is in Chapters 8–10. In
what way does Henry’s injury help to
teach him “that many obligations of
a life were easily avoided”?
➛
➛
➛
➛
Understanding Literature
Crisis. The crisis, or turning point, is the point in a plot where something happens
to determine the future course of events and the eventual fate of the main
character. Based on what you have read so far, what do you think the crisis, or
turning point, of this story may be?
Irony. Irony is a difference between appearance and reality. Explain why each of
the following may be considered an example of irony:
• Henry’s wishing for the Union troops to lose and then being filled with horror
when he witnesses the regiment fleeing in panic
• Henry’s being injured by a fellow soldier
• The corporal’s assessment of Henry’s wound, “Yeh’ve been grazed by a ball.
It’s raised a queer lump jest as if some feller had lammed yeh on th’ head with
a club.”
• The youth’s attitude the next day that “[i]ndeed, when he remembered his
fortunes of yesterday, and looked at them from a distance he began to see
something fine there. He had license to be pompous and veteranlike.”
• Henry’s remembering “how some of the men had run from the battle. As he
recalled their terror-struck faces he felt a scorn for them. They had surely been
more fleet and more wild than was absolutely necessary. They were weak mortals.
As for himself, he had fled with discretion and dignity.”
98 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
Evaluate: MAKING JUDGMENTS
5a. Who is the better friend: Henry
to Wilson or Wilson to Henry?
Consider that Henry feels that he is
in a better position than his friend
Wilson because he knows something
shameful about him—Wilson told
him that he feared he wouldn’t
make it through the battle and
entrusted him with a packet of
papers to give to his family. Wilson,
on the other hand, seems to suspect
what really happened to Henry. Why
do you think the two don’t poke fun
at each other for their weaknesses?
Extend: CONNECTING IDEAS
5b. Imagine that Henry’s desertion
has been discovered and his commanding
officer wishes to try him in
a military court to see if he can be
punished for his actions. You have
been hired as Henry’s defense attorney.
What would you say to defend
him?
➛
Chapter 16
A sputtering of musketry was always to be heard. Later,
the cannon had entered the dispute. In the fog-filled air their
voices made a thudding sound. The reverberations were continual.
This part of the world led a strange, battleful existence.
The youth’s regiment was marched to relieve a command
that had lain long in some damp trenches. The men took
positions behind a curving line of rifle pits1 that had been
turned up, like a large furrow, along the line of woods. Before
them was a level stretch, peopled with short, deformed
stumps. From the woods beyond came the dull popping of
the skirmishers and pickets,2 firing in the fog. From the right
came the noise of a terrific fracas.
The men cuddled3 behind the small embankment and sat
in easy attitudes awaiting their turn. Many had their backs to
the firing. The youth’s friend lay down, buried his face in his
arms, and almost instantly, it seemed, he was in a deep sleep.
The youth leaned his breast against the brown dirt and
peered over at the woods and up and down the line. Curtains
of trees interfered with his ways of vision. He could see the
low line of trenches but for a short distance. A few idle flags
were perched on the dirt hills. Behind them were rows of
dark bodies with a few heads sticking curiously over the top.
Always the noise of skirmishers came from the woods on
the front and left, and the din on the right had grown to
frightful proportions. The guns were roaring without an
instant’s pause for breath. It seemed that the cannon had
come from all parts and were engaged in a stupendous wrangle.
It became impossible to make a sentence heard.
The youth wished to launch a joke—a quotation from
newspapers. He desired to say, “All quiet on the
Rappahannock,”4 but the guns refused to permit even a com-
CHAPTER 16 99
1. rifle pits. Pits or slashes in the earth from which one can fire a weapon and
take cover from enemy attack
2. pickets. Body of soldiers that defends an army from surprise attack
3. cuddled. Lay close to the ground
4. “All . . . Rappahannock.” During the Civil War Northern newspapers
mocked the inactivity of Northern forces by writing, “All quiet on the Potomac.”
The Potomac is a river in Virginia; the Rappahannock, another river in Virginia. WWords
For
Everyday
Use
re • ver • ber • a • tion (ri vər bə
ra￣´shən) n., act of echoing or resounding
fur • row (fər´o￣) n., trench in the earth,
usually made by a plow
fra • cas (fra￣´kəs) n., noisy quarrel; brawl
stu • pen • dous (stu pen´dəs) adj., causing
astonishment or wonder
_ Where is the
youth’s regiment
sent?
_ What does the
youth’s friend do as
soon as the regiment
takes their position in
the trenches?
ment upon their uproar. He never successfully concluded the
sentence. But at last the guns stopped, and among the men
in the rifle pits rumors again flew, like birds, but they were
now for the most part black creatures who flapped their
wings drearily near to the ground and refused to rise on any
wings of hope. The men’s faces grew doleful from the interpreting
of omens. Tales of hesitation and uncertainty on the
part of those high in place and responsibility came to their
ears. Stories of disaster were borne into their minds with
many proofs. This din of musketry on the right, growing like
a released genie5 of sound, expressed and emphasized the
army’s plight.
The men were disheartened and began to mutter. They
made gestures expressive of the sentence: “Ah, what more
can we do?” And it could always be seen that they were
bewildered by the alleged news and could not fully comprehend
a defeat.
Before the gray mists had been totally obliterated by the
sun rays, the regiment was marching in a spread column that
was retiring carefully through the woods. The disordered,
hurrying lines of the enemy could sometimes be seen down
through the groves and little fields. They were yelling, shrill
and exultant.
At this sight the youth forgot many personal matters and
became greatly enraged. He exploded in loud sentences.
“B’jiminey, we’re generaled by a lot ’a lunkheads.”6
“More than one feller has said that t’-day,” observed a
man.
His friend, recently aroused, was still very drowsy. He
looked behind him until his mind took in the meaning of
the movement. Then he sighed. “Oh, well, I s’pose we got
licked,” he remarked sadly.
The youth had a thought that it would not be handsome
for him to freely condemn other men. He made an attempt
to restrain himself, but the words upon his tongue were too
bitter. He presently began a long and intricate denunciation
of the commander of the forces.
100 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
5. released genie. Legendary magic spirit, often described as living in an
enclosed container, that when released serves the person who calls or releases it
6. lunkheads. Stupid persons
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
dole • ful (do￣l´fəl) adj., full of grief
be • wil • der (bi wil´dər) vt., perplex or
confuse
al • leged (ə lejd´) adj., asserted without
proof or before proving
o • blit • er • ate (ô bli´tə ra￣t) vt., remove
from existence
de • nun • ci • a • tion (di nən(t) se￣
a￣´shən) n., public condemnation
_ What does the
regiment learn about
the way the battle is
going?
_ Whom does the
youth condemn?
“Mebbe, it wa’n’t all his fault—not all together. He did th’
best he knowed. It’s our luck t’ git licked often,” said his
friend in a weary tone. He was trudging along with stooped
shoulders and shifting eyes like a man who has been caned7
and kicked.
“Well, don’t we fight like the devil? Don’t we do all that
men can?” demanded the youth loudly.
He was secretly dumfounded at this sentiment when it
came from his lips. For a moment his face lost its valor and
he looked guiltily about him. But no one questioned his
right to deal in such words, and presently he recovered his
air of courage. He went on to repeat a statement he had
heard going from group to group at the camp that morning.
“The brigadier8 said he never saw a new reg’ment fight the
way we fought yestirday, didn’t he? And we didn’t do better
than many another reg’ment, did we? Well, then, you can’t
say it’s th’ army’s fault, can you?”
In his reply, the friend’s voice was stern. “’A course not,”
he said. “No man dare say we don’t fight like th’ devil. No
man will ever dare say it. Th’ boys fight like hell-roosters. But
still—still, we don’t have no luck.”
“Well, then, if we fight like the devil an’ don’t ever whip,
it must be the general’s fault,” said the youth grandly and
decisively. “And I don’t see any sense in fighting and fighting
and fighting, yet always losing through some derned old
lunkhead of a general.”
A sarcastic man who was tramping at the youth’s side,
then spoke lazily. “Mebbe yeh think yeh fit th’ hull battle
yestirday, Fleming,” he remarked.
The speech pierced the youth. Inwardly he was reduced to
an abject pulp by these chance words. His legs quaked privately.
He cast a frightened glance at the sarcastic man.
“Why, no,” he hastened to say in a conciliating voice, “I
don’t think I fought the whole battle yesterday.”
But the other seemed innocent of any deeper meaning.
Apparently, he had no information. It was merely his habit.
“Oh!” he replied in the same tone of calm derision.
The youth, nevertheless, felt a threat. His mind shrank
CHAPTER 16 101
7. caned. Beaten with a cane
8. brigadier. Certain rank of officer in the armed forces
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
dumb • found or dum • found (dəm
faund´) vt., perplex; puzzle
ab • ject (ab´jekt) adj., sunk to or existing
in a low state or condition
pulp (pulp) n., soft mass of vegetable
matter
con • cil • i • at • ing (kən si´le￣ a￣t iŋ)
adj., compatible; reconciling; appeasing
_ What does the
youth’s friend say
about the
commander?
_ According to the
youth, why is the
way the battle is
going the general’s
fault?
_ What sarcastic
comment does one
man make after
hearing the youth
blame the general?
How does this remark
make the youth feel?
from going near to the danger, and thereafter he was silent.
The significance of the sarcastic man’s words took from him
all loud moods that would make him appear prominent. He
became suddenly a modest person.
There was low-toned talk among the troops. The officers
were impatient and snappy, their countenances clouded
with the tales of misfortune. The troops, sifting through the
forest, were sullen. In the youth’s company once a man’s
laugh rang out. A dozen soldiers turned their faces quickly
toward him and frowned with vague displeasure.
The noise of firing dogged their footsteps. Sometimes, it
seemed to be driven a little way, but it always returned again
with increased insolence. The men muttered and cursed,
throwing black looks in its direction.
In a clear space the troops were at last halted. Regiments
and brigades, broken and detached through their encounters
with thickets, grew together again and lines were faced
toward the pursuing bark of the enemy’s infantry.
This noise, following like the yellings of eager, metallic
hounds, increased to a loud and joyous burst, and then, as
the sun went serenely up the sky, throwing illuminating rays
into the gloomy thickets, it broke forth into prolonged pealings.
The woods began to crackle as if afire.
“Whoop-a-dadee,” said a man, “here we are! Everybody
fightin’. Blood an’ destruction.”
“I was willin’ t’ bet they’d attack as soon as th’ sun got
fairly up,” savagely asserted the lieutenant who commanded
the youth’s company. He jerked without mercy at his little
mustache. He strode to and fro with dark dignity in the rear
of his men, who were lying down behind whatever protection
they had collected.
A battery had trundled into position in the rear and was
thoughtfully shelling the distance. The regiment, unmolested
as yet, awaited the moment when the gray shadows of
the woods before them should be slashed by the lines of
flame. There was much growling and swearing.
“Good Gawd,” the youth grumbled, “we’re always being
chased around like rats! It makes me sick. Nobody seems to
know where we go or why we go. We just get fired around
from pillar to post and get licked here and get licked there,
and nobody knows what it’s done for. It makes a man feel
102 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
prom • i • nent (prô´mə nənt) adj., readily noticeable
dog (dôg) vt., hunt or track like a dog
trun • dle (trən´d_l) vt., roll; transport in or as if in a wheeled
vehicle
_ Where is the
regiment halted?
What happens here
as soon as the sun
comes up?
_ How does the
youth feel about
being marched to
this new position?
like a damn’ kitten in a bag. Now, I’d like to know what the
eternal thunders we was marched into these woods for anyhow,
unless it was to give the rebs a regular pot shot9 at us.
We came in here and got our legs all tangled up in these
cussed briers, and then we begin to fight and the rebs had an
easy time of it. Don’t tell me it’s just luck! I know better. It’s
this derned old—”
The friend seemed jaded, but he interrupted his comrade
with a voice of calm confidence. “It’ll turn out all right in th’
end,” he said.
“Oh, the devil it will! You always talk like a dog-hanged
parson.10 Don’t tell me! I know—”
At this time there was an interposition by the savageminded
lieutenant, who was obliged to vent some of his
inward dissatisfaction upon his men. “You boys shut right
up! There no need ’a your wastin’ your breath in longwinded
arguments about this an’ that an’ th’ other. You’ve
been jawin’ like a lot ’a old hens.11 All you’ve got t’ do is to
fight, an’ you’ll get plenty ’a that t’ do in about ten minutes.
Less talkin’ an’ more fightin’ is what’s best for you boys. I
never saw sech gabbling jackasses.”
He paused, ready to pounce upon any man who might
have the temerity to reply. No words being said, he resumed
his dignified pacing.
“There’s too much chin music12 an’ too little fightin’ in
this war, anyhow,” he said to them, turning his head for a
final remark.
The day had grown more white, until the sun shed his full
radiance upon the thronged forest. A sort of a gust of battle
came sweeping toward that part of the line where lay the
youth’s regiment. The front shifted a trifle to meet it
squarely. There was a wait. In this part of the field there
passed slowly the intense moments that precede the tempest.
A single rifle flashed in a thicket before the regiment. In
an instant it was joined by many others. There was a mighty
song of clashes and crashes that went sweeping through the
CHAPTER 16 103
9. pot shot. Shot taken from ambush at an easy target
10. parson. Clergyman
11. jawin’ . . . hens. Contemptuous phrase meaning, “talking like old women”
12. chin music. Talking
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
in • ter • po • si • tion (in tər pə zi´shən)
n., interruption; interjection
te • mer • i • ty (tə mer´ə te￣) n., unreasonable
or foolhardy contempt of danger
or opposition
tem • pest (tem´pəst) n., violent storm
_ What does the
youth’s friend tell
him?
_ What does the
lieutenant find to
criticize in the youth
and the other
soldiers?
_ What is the
lieutenant’s opinion
about what is wrong
with the war?
woods. The guns in the rear, aroused and enraged by shells
that had been thrown burr-like13 at them, suddenly involved
themselves in a hideous altercation with another band of
guns. The battle roar settled to a rolling thunder, which was
a single, long explosion.
In the regiment there was a peculiar kind of hesitation
denoted in the attitudes of the men. They were worn,
exhausted, having slept but little and labored much. They
rolled their eyes toward the advancing battle as they stood
awaiting the shock. Some shrank and flinched. They stood as
men tied to stakes.
104 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
13. burr-like. Like burrs, or prickly seeds or pods
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
al • ter • ca • tion (äl tər ka￣´shən) n., noisy heated angry
dispute
de • note (di no￣t´) vt., make known
flinch (flinch) vt., withdraw or shrink from or as if from pain
_ What is the
regiment’s reaction
just before they must
begin to fight?
Chapter 17
This advance of the enemy had seemed to the youth like
a ruthless hunting. He began to fume with rage and exasperation.
He beat his foot upon the ground, and scowled
with hate at the swirling smoke that was approaching like a
phantom flood. There was a maddening quality in this
seeming resolution of the foe to give him no rest, to give
him no time to sit down and think. Yesterday he had fought
and had fled rapidly. There had been many adventures. For
to-day he felt that he had earned opportunities for contemplative
repose. He could have enjoyed portraying to uninitiated
listeners various scenes at which he had been a witness
or ably discussing the processes of war with other proved
men. Too it was important that he should have time for
physical recuperation. He was sore and stiff from his experiences.
He had received his fill of all exertions, and he
wished to rest.
But those other men seemed never to grow weary; they
were fighting with their old speed. He had a wild hate for the
relentless foe. Yesterday, when he had imagined the universe
to be against him, he had hated it, little gods and big gods;
to-day he hated the army of the foe with the same great
hatred. He was not going to be badgered of his life, like a kitten
chased by boys, he said. It was not well to drive men into
final corners; at those moments they could all develop teeth
and claws.
He leaned and spoke into his friend’s ear. He menaced the
words with a gesture. “If they keep on chasing us, by Gawd,
they’d better watch out. Can’t stand too much.”
The friend twisted his head and made a calm reply. “If
they keep on a-chasin’ us they’ll drive us all inteh th’ river.”
The youth cried out savagely at this statement. He
crouched behind a little tree, with his eyes burning hatefully
and his teeth set in a curlike1 snarl. The awkward bandage
was still about his head, and upon it, over his wound, there
was a spot of dry blood. His hair was wondrously tousled,
and some straggling, moving locks hung over the cloth of
CHAPTER 17 105
1. curlike. Like a dog
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
fume (fyo—_om) vi., be in a state of excited
irritation or anger
con • tem • pla • tive (kən tem´plə tiv)
adj., marked by or given to thought or consideration
re • pose (ri po￣z´) n., state of resting after
activity or strain
tou • sled (tau´zəld) adj., disheveled; rumpled
_ Why does the
enemy make the
youth angry? What
does he think he
deserves to do today?
_ What words
might you use to
describe the youth’s
appearance?
the bandage down toward his forehead. His jacket and shirt
were open at the throat, and exposed his young bronzed
neck. There could be seen spasmodic gulpings at his throat.
His fingers twined nervously about his rifle. He wished
that it was an engine of annihilating power. He felt that he
and his companions were being taunted and derided from
sincere convictions that they were poor and puny. His
knowledge of his inability to take vengeance for it made his
rage into a dark and stormy specter, that possessed him and
made him dream of abominable cruelties. The tormentors
were flies sucking insolently at his blood, and he thought
that he would have given his life for a revenge of seeing their
faces in pitiful plights.
The winds of battle had swept all about the regiment,
until the one rifle, instantly followed by brothers, flashed in
its front. A moment later the regiment roared forth its sudden
and valiant retort. A dense wall of smoke settled slowly
down. It was furiously slit and slashed by the knifelike fire
from the rifles.
To the youth the fighters resembled animals tossed for a
death struggle into a dark pit. There was a sensation that he
and his fellows, at bay, were pushing back, always pushing
fierce onslaughts of creatures who were slippery. Their beams
of crimson seemed to get no purchase upon the bodies of
their foes; the latter seemed to evade them with ease, and
come through, between, around, and about with unopposed
skill.
When, in a dream, it occurred to the youth that his rifle
was an impotent stick, he lost sense of everything but his
hate, his desire to smash into pulp the glittering smile of victory
which he could feel upon the faces of his enemies.
The blue smoke-swallowed line curled and writhed like a
snake stepped upon. It swung its ends to and fro in an agony
of fear and rage.
The youth was not conscious that he was erect upon his
feet. He did not know the direction of the ground. Indeed,
once he even lost the habit of balance and fell heavily. He
was up again immediately. One thought went through the
chaos of his brain at the time. He wondered if he had fallen
because he had been shot. But the suspicion flew away at
once. He did not think more of it.
106 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
spas • mod • ic (spaz mô´dik) adj.,
affected or characterized by involuntary
muscular contractions
spec • ter (spek´tər) n., something that
haunts or perturbs the mind
abom • i • na • ble (ə bəm´nə bəl) adj., of
or causing disgust or hatred
val • iant (val´yənt) adj., courageous
bay (ba￣) n., position of one unable to
retreat and forced to face danger
_ What do the
fighting men look like
to the youth?
_ What emotion fills
the youth in the
battle?
He had taken up a first position behind the little tree, with
a direct determination to hold it against the world. He had
not deemed it possible that his army could that day succeed,
and from this he felt the ability to fight harder. But the
throng had surged in all ways, until he lost directions and
locations, save that he knew where lay the enemy.
The flames bit him, and the hot smoke broiled his skin.
His rifle barrel grew so hot that ordinarily he could not have
borne it upon his palms; but he kept on stuffing cartridges
into it, and pounding them with his clanking, bending ramrod.
If he aimed at some changing form through the smoke,
he pulled his trigger with a fierce grunt, as if he were dealing
a blow of the fist with all his strength.
When the enemy seemed falling back before him and his
fellows, he went instantly forward, like a dog who, seeing his
foes lagging, turns and insists upon being pursued. And
when he was compelled to retire again, he did it slowly, sullenly,
taking steps of wrathful despair.
Once he, in his intent hate, was almost alone, and was firing,
when all those near him had ceased. He was so
engrossed in his occupation that he was not aware of a lull.
He was recalled by a hoarse laugh and a sentence that
came to his ears in a voice of contempt and amazement.
“Yeh infernal fool, don’t yeh know enough t’ quit when
there ain’t anything t’ shoot at? Good Gawd!”
He turned then and, pausing with his rifle thrown half
into position, looked at the blue line of his comrades. During
this moment of leisure they seemed all to be engaged in staring
with astonishment at him. They had become spectators.
Turning to the front again he saw, under the lifted smoke, a
deserted ground.
He looked bewildered for a moment. Then there appeared
upon the glazed vacancy of his eyes a diamond point of
intelligence. “Oh,” he said, comprehending.
He returned to his comrades and threw himself upon the
ground. He sprawled like a man who had been thrashed. His
flesh seemed strangely on fire, and the sounds of the battle
continued in his ears. He groped blindly for his canteen.
The lieutenant was crowing. He seemed drunk with fighting.
He called out to the youth: “By heavens, if I had ten
thousand wild cats like you I could tear th’ stomach outa this
war in less’n a week!” He puffed out his chest with large dignity
as he said it.
Some of the men muttered and looked at the youth in
awe-struck ways. It was plain that as he had gone on loading
CHAPTER 17 107
_ What does the
youth do when the
enemy falls back?
When the enemy
advances?
_ What action does
the youth perform
that surprises his
fellow soldiers? What
does the youth
realize when the
smoke clears?
_ How does the
lieutenant feel about
the fight? About the
youth’s actions in the
fight?
and firing and cursing without the proper intermission, they
had found time to regard him. And they now looked upon
him as a war devil.
The friend came staggering to him. There was some fright
and dismay in his voice. “Are yeh all right, Fleming? Do yeh
feel all right? There ain’t nothin’ th’ matter with yeh, Henry,
is there?”
“No,” said the youth with difficulty. His throat seemed
full of knobs and burrs.
These incidents made the youth ponder. It was revealed to
him that he had been a barbarian, a beast. He had fought like
a pagan who defends his religion. Regarding it, he saw that
it was fine, wild, and, in some ways, easy. He had been a
tremendous figure, no doubt. By this struggle he had overcome
obstacles which he had admitted to be mountains.
They had fallen like paper peaks, and he was now what he
called a hero. And he had not been aware of the process. He
had slept and, awakening, found himself a knight.
He lay and basked in the occasional stares of his comrades.
Their faces were varied in degrees of blackness from
the burned powder. Some were utterly smudged. They were
reeking with perspiration, and their breaths came hard and
wheezing. And from these soiled expanses they peered at
him.
“Hot work!2 Hot work!” cried the lieutenant deliriously.
He walked up and down, restless and eager. Sometimes his
voice could be heard in a wild, incomprehensible laugh.
When he had a particularly profound thought upon the
science of war he always unconsciously addressed himself to
the youth.
There was some grim rejoicing by the men. “By thunder,
I bet this army’ll never see another new reg’ment like us!”
“You bet!”
“A dog, a woman, an’ a walnut tree,
Th’ more yeh beat ’em, th’ better they be!
That’s like us.”
108 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
2. Hot work. Good work
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
pa • gan (pa￣´gən) n., follower of a religion
that worships more than one god
bask (bask) vi., take pleasure or obtain
enjoyment
de • lir • i • ous • ly (di lir´e￣ əs le￣) adv., in
an irrational manner
pro • found (prə faund´) adj., having
intellectual depth and insight
_ How do the men
now regard the
youth? Why do you
think the youth’s
friend asks him if he
is “all right”?
_ What does the
youth suddenly
realize about his
actions?
_ With whom does
the lieutenant now
discuss his thoughts
about the war?
“Lost a piler3 men, they did. If an’ ol’ woman swep’ up th’
woods she’d git a dustpanful.”
“Yes, an’ if she’ll come around ag’in in ’bout an hour she’ll
git a pile more.”
The forest still bore its burden of clamor. From off under
the trees came the rolling clatter of the musketry. Each distant
thicket seemed a strange porcupine4 with quills of
flame. A cloud of dark smoke, as from smoldering ruins,
went up toward the sun now bright and gay in the blue,
enameled sky.
CHAPTER 17 109
3. piler. Pile of
4. porcupine. Large rodent with sharp erect bristles
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
e • nam • eled (e na´məld) adj., covered with a glossy, hard
surface
Chapter 18
The ragged line had respite for some minutes, but during
its pause the struggle in the forest became magnified until
the trees seemed to quiver from the firing and the ground to
shake from the rushing of the men. The voices of the cannon
were mingled in a long and interminable row. It seemed difficult
to live in such an atmosphere. The chests of the men
strained for a bit of freshness, and their throats craved water.
There was one shot through the body, who raised a cry of
bitter lamentation when came this lull. Perhaps he had been
calling out during the fighting also, but at that time no one
had heard him. But now the men turned at the woeful complaints
of him upon the ground.
“Who is it? Who is it?”
“It’s Jimmie Rogers. Jimmie Rogers.”
When their eyes first encountered him there was a sudden
halt, as if they feared to go near. He was thrashing about in
the grass, twisting his shuddering body into many strange
postures. He was screaming loudly. This instant’s hesitation
seemed to fill him with a tremendous, fantastic contempt,
and he damned them in shrieked sentences.
The youth’s friend had a geographical illusion concerning
a stream, and he obtained permission to go for some water.
Immediately canteens were showered upon him. “Fill mine,
will yeh?” “Bring me some, too.” “And me, too.” He
departed, ladened. The youth went with his friend, feeling a
desire to throw his heated body into the stream and, soaking
there, drink quarts.1
They made a hurried search for the supposed stream, but
did not find it. “No water here,” said the youth. They turned
without delay and began to retrace their steps.
From their position as they again faced toward the place
of the fighting, they could of course comprehend a greater
amount of the battle than when their visions had been
blurred by the hurlyng smoke of the line. They could see
dark stretches winding along the land, and on one cleared
space there was a row of guns making gray clouds, which
110 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
1. quarts. Many cups full
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
re • spite (res´pət) n., period of rest or relief
in • ter • mi • na • ble (in tərm´nə bəl)
adj., having or seeming to have no end
lam • en • ta • tion (la mən ta￣´shən) n., act
or instance of mourning, grieving, sobbing
pos • ture (pôs´chər) n., position or bearing
of the body
lad • ened (la￣d´end) vt., heavily loaded
_ What do the
soldiers notice once
they stop fighting for
a few moments?
_ What do the
youth and his friend
leave the regiment to
do? Are they
successful?
were filled with large flashes of orange-colored flame. Over
some foliage they could see the roof of a house. One window,
glowing a deep murder red, shone squarely through the
leaves. From the edifice a tall leaning tower of smoke went
far into the sky.
Looking over their own troops, they saw mixed masses
slowly getting into regular form. The sunlight made twinkling
points of the bright steel. To the rear there was a
glimpse of a distant roadway as it curved over a slope. It was
crowded with retreating infantry. From all the interwoven
forest arose the smoke and bluster of the battle. The air was
always occupied by a blaring.
Near where they stood shells were flip-flapping and hooting.
2 Occasional bullets buzzed in the air and spanged3 into
tree trunks. Wounded men and other stragglers were slinking
through the woods.
Looking down an aisle of the grove, the youth and his
companion saw a jangling general and his staff almost ride
upon a wounded man, who was crawling on his hands and
knees. The general reined strongly at his charger’s opened
and foamy mouth and guided it with dexterous horsemanship
past the man. The latter scrambled in wild and torturing
haste. His strength evidently failed him as he reached a
place of safety. One of his arms suddenly weakened, and he
fell, sliding over upon his back. He lay stretched out, breathing
gently.
A moment later the small, creaking cavalcade4 was
directly in front of the two soldiers. Another officer, riding
with the skillful abandon of a cowboy, galloped his horse to
a position directly before the general. The two unnoticed
foot soldiers made a little show of going on, but they lingered
near in the desire to overhear the conversation.
Perhaps, they thought, some great inner historical things
would be said.
The general, whom the boys knew as the commander of
their division, looked at the other officer and spoke coolly, as
if he were criticizing his clothes. “Th’ enemy’s formin’ over
CHAPTER 18 111
2. flip-flapping and hooting. Flipping in the air and making a loud clamorous
mechanical sound
3. spanged. Hit squarely
4. cavalcade. Procession of riders
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
ed • i • fice (e´də fəs) n., building
blus • ter (bləs´tər) n., violent commotion
blar • ing (blar´iŋ) n., loud sound
_ What do the
youth and his friend
see happening to a
house?
_ What do they see
happen in a grove?
_ Whom are the
youth and his friend
near? Why do they
linger near these
people?
there for another charge,” he said. “It’ll be directed against
Whiterside, an’ I fear they’ll break through there unless we
work like thunder t’ stop them.”
The other swore at his restive horse, and then cleared his
throat. He made a gesture toward his cap. “It’ll be hell t’ pay
stoppin’ them,” he said shortly.
“I presume so,” remarked the general. Then he began to
talk rapidly and in a lower tone. He frequently illustrated his
words with a pointing finger. The two infantrymen could
hear nothing until finally he asked: “What troops can you
spare?”
The officer who rode like a cowboy reflected for an
instant. “Well,” he said, “I had to order in th’ 12th to help
th’ 76th, an’ I haven’t really got any. But there’s th’ 304th.
They fight like a lot ’a mule drivers.5 I can spare them best of
any.”
The youth and his friend exchanged glances of astonishment.
The general spoke sharply. “Get ’em ready, then. I’ll watch
developments from here, an’ send you word when t’ start
them. It’ll happen in five minutes.”
As the other officer tossed his fingers toward his cap and
wheeling his horse, started away, the general called out to
him in a sober voice: “I don’t believe many of your mule
drivers will get back.”
The other shouted something in reply. He smiled.
With scared faces, the youth and his companion hurried
back to the line.
These happenings had occupied an incredibly short time,
yet the youth felt that in them he had been made aged. New
eyes were given to him. And the most startling thing was to
learn suddenly that he was very insignificant. The officer
spoke of the regiment as if he referred to a broom. Some part
of the woods needed sweeping, perhaps, and he merely indicated
a broom in a tone properly indifferent to its fate. It was
war, no doubt, but it appeared strange.
As the two boys approached the line, the lieutenant perceived
them and swelled with wrath. “Fleming—Wilson—
112 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
5. mule drivers. The officer is implying that the 304th regiment does not contain
the most valuable, skillful soldiers.
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
res • tive (res´tiv) adj., stubbornly resisting
control
pre • sume (pri zo—_om_) vt., expect or
assume especially with confidence
wheel (we￣l) vt., cause to change direction
as in a circle
in • dif • fer • ent (in dif´rənt) adj., marked
by a lack of interest, enthusiasm, or concern
for something
_ What do the two
soldiers learn about
the enemy’s plans
and what the general
plans to do?
_ Which troop does
the officer say he can
spare? In what way
does he describe this
troop?
_ How do the youth
and his friend feel
about what they
have learned? Whose
troop is the 304th?
_ What does the
general say to the
officer about the
chosen group of
soldiers?
_ What does the
youth find startling?
how long does it take yeh to git water, anyhow—where yeh
been to.”
But his oration ceased as he saw their eyes, which were
large with great tales. “We’re goin’ t’ charge—we’re goin’ t’
charge!” cried the youth’s friend, hastening with his news.
“Charge?” said the lieutenant. “Charge? Well, b’Gawd!
Now, this is real fightin’.” Over his soiled countenance there
went a boastful smile. “Charge? Well, b’Gawd!”
A little group of soldiers surrounded the two youths. “Are
we, sure ’nough? Well, I’ll be derned! Charge? What fer?
What at? Wilson, you’re lyin’.”
“I hope to die,” said the youth, pitching his tones to the
key of angry remonstrance. “Sure as shooting, I tell you.”
And his friend spoke in re-enforcement. “Not by a blame
sight, he ain’t lyin’. We heard ’em talkin’.”
They caught sight of two mounted figures a short distance
from them. One was the colonel of the regiment and the
other was the officer who had received orders from the commander
of the division. They were gesticulating at each
other. The soldier, pointing at them, interpreted the scene.
One man had a final objection: “How could yeh hear ’em
talkin’?” But the men, for a large part, nodded, admitting
that previously the two friends had spoken truth.
They settled back into reposeful attitudes with airs of having
accepted the matter. And they mused upon it, with a
hundred varieties of expression. It was an engrossing thing
to think about. Many tightened their belts carefully and
hitched at their trousers.
A moment later the officers began to bustle among the
men, pushing them into a more compact mass and into a
better alignment. They chased those that straggled and
fumed at a few men who seemed to show by their attitudes
that they had decided to remain at that spot. They were like
critical shepherds struggling with sheep.
Presently, the regiment seemed to draw itself up and
heave a deep breath. None of the men’s faces were mirrors of
large thoughts. The soldiers were bended and stooped like
sprinters before a signal. Many pairs of glinting eyes peered
from the grimy faces toward the curtains of the deeper
woods. They seemed to be engaged in deep calculations of
time and distance.
CHAPTER 18 113 WWords
For
Everyday
Use
re • mon • strance (ri mən(t)´strən(t)s)
n., presentation of reasons for opposition
or complaint
en • gross • ing (en gro￣´siŋ) adj., occupying
the attention completely
sprint • er (sprint´ər) n., person who runs
a fast race for a short distance
_ What do the two
soldiers tell the
lieutenant when they
return? How does the
lieutenant feel about
this news?
_ What actions do
the officers take to
ready the soldiers for
battle?
They were surrounded by the noises of the monstrous
altercation between the two armies. The world was fully
interested in other matters. Apparently, the regiment had its
small affair to itself.The youth, turning, shot a quick, inquiring
glance at his friend. The latter returned to him the same
manner of look. They were the only ones who possessed an
inner knowledge. “Mule drivers—hell t’ pay—don’t believe
many will get back.” It was an ironical secret. Still, they saw
no hesitation in each other’s faces, and they nodded a mute
and unprotesting assent when a shaggy man near them said
in a meek voice: “We’ll git swallowed.”
114 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
as • sent (ə sent´) n., agreement; consent
_ What secret do
the youth and his
friend share?
Chapter 19
The youth stared at the land in front of him. Its foliages
now seemed to veil powers and horrors. He was unaware of
the machinery of orders that started the charge, although
from the corners of his eyes he saw an officer, who looked
like a boy a-horseback, come galloping, waving his hat.
Suddenly he felt a straining and heaving among the men.
The line fell slowly forward like a toppling wall, and, with a
convulsive gasp that was intended for a cheer, the regiment
began its journey. The youth was pushed and jostled for a
moment before he understood the movement at all, but
directly he lunged ahead and began to run.
He fixed his eye upon a distant and prominent clump of
trees where he had concluded the enemy were to be met, and
he ran toward it as toward a goal. He had believed throughout
that it was a mere question of getting over an unpleasant
matter as quickly as possible, and he ran desperately, as if
pursued for a murder. His face was drawn hard and tight with
the stress of his endeavor. His eyes were fixed in a lurid glare.
And with his soiled and disordered dress, his red and
inflamed features surmounted by the dingy rag with its spot
of blood, his wildly swinging rifle and banging accouterments,
he looked to be an insane soldier.
As the regiment swung from its position out into a cleared
space the woods and thickets before it awakened. Yellow
flames leaped toward it from many directions. The forest
made a tremendous objection.
The line lurched straight for a moment. Then the right
wing1 swung forward; it in turn was surpassed by the left.
Afterward the center careered to the front until the regiment
was a wedge-shaped mass, but an instant later the opposition
of the bushes, trees, and uneven places on the ground split
the command and scattered it into detached clusters.
The youth, light-footed, was unconsciously in advance.
His eyes still kept note of the clump of trees. From all places
near it the clannish yell of the enemy could be heard. The little
flames of rifles leaped from it. The song of the bullets was
CHAPTER 19 115
1. wing. Section of an army to the right or to the left
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
con • vul • sive (kən vəl´siv) adj., violent,
sudden, frantic, or spasmodic
sur • mount (sər maunt´) vt., stand or lie at
the top of
ac • cou • tre • ment or ac • cou • ter •
ment (ə ko—_o´trə mənt) n., equipment, trappings
clan • nish (kla´nish) adj., of or relating to
a close group
_ What does the
youth’s regiment
begin to do?
_ In what direction
does the youth run?
What is his attitude
toward the charge?
_ What makes the
youth look like an
“insane soldier”?
_ What happens as
the regiment runs
into a “cleared
space”?
in the air and shells snarled among the treetops. One tumbled
directly into the middle of a hurrying group and exploded in
crimson fury. There was an instant’s spectacle of a man,
almost over it, throwing up his hands to shield his eyes.
Other men, punched by bullets, fell in grotesque agonies.
The regiment left a coherent trail of bodies.
They had passed into a clearer atmosphere. There was an
effect like a revelation in the new appearance of the landscape.
Some men working madly at a battery were plain to
them, and the opposing infantry’s lines were defined by the
gray walls and fringes of smoke.
It seemed to the youth that he saw everything. Each blade
of the green grass was bold and clear. He thought that he was
aware of every change in the thin, transparent vapor that
floated idly in sheets. The brown or gray trunks of the trees
showed each roughness of their surfaces. And the men of the
regiment, with their starting eyes and sweating faces, running
madly, or falling, as if thrown headlong, to queer,
heaped-up corpses—all were comprehended. His mind took
a mechanical but firm impression, so that afterward everything
was pictured and explained to him, save why he himself
was there.
But there was a frenzy made from this furious rush. The
men, pitching forward insanely, had burst into cheerings,
moblike and barbaric, but tuned in strange keys that can
arouse the dullard2 and the stoic. It made a mad enthusiasm
that, it seemed, would be incapable of checking itself before
granite and brass. There was the delirium that encounters
despair and death, and is heedless and blind to the odds. It
is a temporary but sublime absence of selfishness. And
because it was of this order was the reason, perhaps, why the
youth wondered, afterward, what reasons he could have had
for being there.
Presently the straining pace ate up the energies of the
men. As if by agreement, the leaders began to slacken their
speed. The volleys directed against them had had a seeming
windlike effect. The regiment snorted and blew. Among
some stolid trees it began to falter and hesitate. The men,
staring intently, began to wait for some of the distant walls
of smoke to move and disclose to them the scene. Since
116 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
co • her • ent (co￣ hir´ənt) adj., logically
ordered; consistent
rev • e • la • tion (re və la´shən) n., act of
revealing or communicating divine truth
sto • ic (sto￣´ik) n., one apparently or professedly
indifferent to pleasure or pain
de • lir • i • um (di lir´e￣ əm) n., frenzied
excitement
_ What can be seen
once they charge into
a less smoke-filled
area?
_ What does the
youth seem to think
is happening to his
senses?
_ What are the men
encountering? What
are they “heedless”
to? What human
emotion do the men
become free of,
temporarily, in their
charge?
_ What happens as
soon as the regiment
slows their pace?
2. dullard. Stupid or unimaginative person
much of their strength and their breath had vanished, they
returned to caution. They were become men again.
The youth had a vague belief that he had run miles, and
he thought, in a way, that he was now in some new and
unknown land.
The moment the regiment ceased its advance the protesting
splutter of musketry became a steadied roar. Long and
accurate fringes of smoke spread out. From the top of a small
hill came level belchings of yellow flame that caused an
inhuman whistling in the air.
The men, halted, had opportunity to see some of their
comrades dropping with moans and shrieks. A few lay under
foot, still or wailing. And now for an instant the men stood,
their rifles slack in their hands, and watched the regiment
dwindle. They appeared dazed and stupid. This spectacle
seemed to paralyze them, overcome them with a fatal fascination.
They stared woodenly at the sights, and, lowering
their eyes, looked from face to face. It was a strange pause,
and a strange silence.
Then, above the sounds of the outside commotion, arose
the roar of the lieutenant. He strode suddenly forth, his
infantile features black with rage.
“Come on, yeh fools!” he bellowed. “Come on! Yeh can’t
stay here. Yeh must come on.” He said more, but much of it
could not be understood.
He started rapidly forward, with his head turned toward
the men. “Come on,” he was shouting. The men stared with
blank and yokel-like eyes at him. He was obliged to halt and
retrace his steps. He stood then with his back to the enemy
and delivered gigantic curses into the faces of the men. His
body vibrated from the weight and force of his imprecations.
And he could string oaths with the facility of a maiden who
strings beads.
The friend of the youth aroused. Lurching suddenly forward
and dropping to his knees, he fired an angry shot at the
persistent woods. This action awakened the men. They huddled
no more like sheep. They seemed suddenly to bethink
them of their weapons, and at once commenced firing.
Belabored by their officers, they began to move forward. The
regiment, involved like a cart involved in mud and muddle,
started unevenly with many jolts and jerks. The men
CHAPTER 19 117 WWords
For
Everyday
Use
be • la • bor (bi la￣´bər) vt., attack verbally
mud • dle (mə´d_l) n., confused mess
_ What happens to
the men halted in
front of enemy fire?
What do the men
seem to be unable to
do?
_ Who tries to urge
the men to move? Is
he successful at first?
_ What does the
youth’s friend do?
What is the effect of
this action on the
rest of the regiment?
stopped now every few paces to fire and load, and in this
manner moved slowly on from trees to trees.
The flaming opposition in their front grew with their
advance until it seemed that all forward ways were barred by
the thin leaping tongues, and off to the right an ominous
demonstration could sometimes be dimly discerned. The
smoke lately generated was in confusing clouds that made it
difficult for the regiment to proceed with intelligence. As he
passed through each curling mass the youth wondered what
would confront him on the farther side.
The command went painfully forward until an open space
interposed between them and the lurid lines. Here, crouching
and cowering behind some trees, the men clung with
desperation, as if threatened by a wave. They looked wildeyed,
and as if amazed at this furious disturbance they had
stirred. In the storm there was an ironical expression of their
importance. The faces of the men, too, showed a lack of certain
feeling of responsibility for being there. It was as if they
had been driven. It was the dominant animal failing to
remember in the supreme moments the forceful causes of
various superficial qualities. The whole affair seemed incomprehensible
to many of them.
As they halted thus the lieutenant again began to bellow
profanely. Regardless of the vindictive threats of the bullets,
he went about coaxing, berating, and bedamning. His lips,
that were habitually in a soft and childlike curve, were now
writhed into unholy contortions. He swore by all possible
deities.
Once he grabbed the youth by the arm. “Come on, yeh
lunkhead!” he roared. “Come on! We’ll all git killed if we stay
here. We’ve on’y got t’ go across that lot. An’ then”—the
remainder of his idea disappeared in a blue haze of curses.
The youth stretched forth his arm. “Cross there?” His
mouth was puckered in doubt and awe.
“Certainly. Jest ’cross th’ lot! We can’t stay here,”
screamed the lieutenant. He poked his face close to the
youth and waved his bandaged hand. “Come on!” Presently
he grappled with him as if for a wrestling bout. It was as if he
planned to drag the youth by the ear on to the assault.
The private felt a sudden unspeakable indignation against
his officer. He wrenched fiercely and shook him off.
118 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
dis • cern (di sərn´) vt., detect with the eyes
lu • rid (lur´əd) adj., shining with the red
glow of fire seen through smoke or cloud
be • rate (bi ra￣t´) vt., scold or condemn
strongly and at length
in • dig • na • tion (in dig na￣´shən) n.,
anger aroused by something unjust,
unworthy, or mean
_ What happens to
slow the regiment’s
forward progress?
_ What does the
lieutenant tell the
youth?
“Come on yerself, then,” he yelled. There was a bitter
challenge in his voice.
They galloped together down the regimental front. The
friend scrambled after them. In front of the colors the three
men began to bawl: “Come on! come on!” They danced and
gyrated like tortured savages.
The flag, obedient to these appeals, bended its glittering
form and swept toward them. The men wavered in indecision
for a moment, and then with a long, wailful cry the
dilapidated regiment surged forward and began its new journey.
Over the field went the scurrying mass. It was a handful
of men splattered into the faces of the enemy. Toward it
instantly sprang the yellow tongues. A vast quantity of blue
smoke hung before them. A mighty banging made ears valueless.
The youth ran like a madman to reach the woods before a
bullet could discover him. He ducked his head low, like a
football player. In his haste his eyes almost closed, and the
scene was a wild blur. Pulsating saliva stood at the corners of
his mouth.
Within him, as he hurled himself forward, was born a
love, a despairing fondness for this flag which was near him.
It was a creation of beauty and invulnerability. It was a goddess,
radiant, that bended its form with an imperious gesture
to him. It was a woman, red and white, hating and loving,
that called him with the voice of his hopes. Because no harm
could come to it he endowed it with power. He kept near, as
if it could be a saver of lives, and an imploring cry went from
his mind.
In the mad scramble he was aware that the color sergeant
flinched suddenly, as if struck by a bludgeon.3 He faltered,
and then became motionless, save for his quivering knees.
He made a spring and a clutch at the pole. At the same
instant his friend grabbed it from the other side. They jerked
at it, stout and furious, but the color sergeant was dead, and
the corpse would not relinquish its trust. For a moment there
was a grim encounter. The dead man, swinging with bended
CHAPTER 19 119
3. bludgeon. Short stick used as a weapon
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
gy • rate (j_￣´ra￣t) vi., swing with a circular or
spiral motion
in • vul • ner • a • bil • I • ty (in vəl nə rə
bi´lə te￣) n., quality of being immune to attack
im • pe • ri • ous (im pir´e￣ əs) adj., commanding;
intensely compelling
en • dow (en dau´) vt., provide with something
freely or naturally
re • lin • quish (ri liŋ´kwish) vt., give up
_ What challenge
does the youth offer
the lieutenant? What
do the youth, the
lieutenant, and the
youth’s friend do
then?
_ What do the three
men inspire the rest
of the regiment to
do? How do the
number of soldiers in
the regiment
compare to the
numbers of the
enemy?
_ How does the
youth feel about his
regiment’s flag?
What does it seem to
be to him?
_ What happens to
the color sergeant
who carries the flag?
What do the youth
and his friend do?
What does the dead
man seem to be
doing?
back, seemed to be obstinately tugging, in ludicrous and
awful ways, for the possession of the flag.
It was past in an instant of time. They wrenched the flag
furiously from the dead man, and, as they turned again, the
corpse swayed forward with bowed head. One arm swung
high, and the curved hand fell with heavy protest on the
friend’s unheeding shoulder.
120 THE RED BADGE OF CO Presently, the regiment seemed to draw itself up and
heave a deep breath. None of the men’s faces were mirrors of
large thoughts. The soldiers were bended and stooped like
sprinters before a signal. Many pairs of glinting eyes peered
from the grimy faces toward the curtains of the deeper
woods. They seemed to be engaged in deep calculations of
time and distance.
CHAPTER 18 113 WWords
For
Everyday
Use
re • mon • strance (ri mən(t)´strən(t)s)
n., presentation of reasons for opposition
or complaint
en • gross • ing (en gro￣´siŋ) adj., occupying
the attention completely
sprint • er (sprint´ər) n., person who runs
a fast race for a short distance
_ What do the two
soldiers tell the
lieutenant when they
return? How does the
lieutenant feel about
this news?
_ What actions do
the officers take to
ready the soldiers for
battle?
They were surrounded by the noises of the monstrous
altercation between the two armies. The world was fully
interested in other matters. Apparently, the regiment had its
small affair to itself.The youth, turning, shot a quick, inquiring
glance at his friend. The latter returned to him the same
manner of look. They were the only ones who possessed an
inner knowledge. “Mule drivers—hell t’ pay—don’t believe
many will get back.” It was an ironical secret. Still, they saw
no hesitation in each other’s faces, and they nodded a mute
and unprotesting assent when a shaggy man near them said
in a meek voice: “We’ll git swallowed.”
114 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
as • sent (ə sent´) n., agreement; consent
_ What secret do
the youth and his
friend share?
Chapter 19
The youth stared at the land in front of him. Its foliages
now seemed to veil powers and horrors. He was unaware of
the machinery of orders that started the charge, although
from the corners of his eyes he saw an officer, who looked
like a boy a-horseback, come galloping, waving his hat.
Suddenly he felt a straining and heaving among the men.
The line fell slowly forward like a toppling wall, and, with a
convulsive gasp that was intended for a cheer, the regiment
began its journey. The youth was pushed and jostled for a
moment before he understood the movement at all, but
directly he lunged ahead and began to run.
He fixed his eye upon a distant and prominent clump of
trees where he had concluded the enemy were to be met, and
he ran toward it as toward a goal. He had believed throughout
that it was a mere question of getting over an unpleasant
matter as quickly as possible, and he ran desperately, as if
pursued for a murder. His face was drawn hard and tight with
the stress of his endeavor. His eyes were fixed in a lurid glare.
And with his soiled and disordered dress, his red and
inflamed features surmounted by the dingy rag with its spot
of blood, his wildly swinging rifle and banging accouterments,
he looked to be an insane soldier.
As the regiment swung from its position out into a cleared
space the woods and thickets before it awakened. Yellow
flames leaped toward it from many directions. The forest
made a tremendous objection.
The line lurched straight for a moment. Then the right
wing1 swung forward; it in turn was surpassed by the left.
Afterward the center careered to the front until the regiment
was a wedge-shaped mass, but an instant later the opposition
of the bushes, trees, and uneven places on the ground split
the command and scattered it into detached clusters.
The youth, light-footed, was unconsciously in advance.
His eyes still kept note of the clump of trees. From all places
near it the clannish yell of the enemy could be heard. The little
flames of rifles leaped from it. The song of the bullets was
CHAPTER 19 115
1. wing. Section of an army to the right or to the left
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
con • vul • sive (kən vəl´siv) adj., violent,
sudden, frantic, or spasmodic
sur • mount (sər maunt´) vt., stand or lie at
the top of
ac • cou • tre • ment or ac • cou • ter •
ment (ə ko—_o´trə mənt) n., equipment, trappings
clan • nish (kla´nish) adj., of or relating to
a close group
_ What does the
youth’s regiment
begin to do?
_ In what direction
does the youth run?
What is his attitude
toward the charge?
_ What makes the
youth look like an
“insane soldier”?
_ What happens as
the regiment runs
into a “cleared
space”?
in the air and shells snarled among the treetops. One tumbled
directly into the middle of a hurrying group and exploded in
crimson fury. There was an instant’s spectacle of a man,
almost over it, throwing up his hands to shield his eyes.
Other men, punched by bullets, fell in grotesque agonies.
The regiment left a coherent trail of bodies.
They had passed into a clearer atmosphere. There was an
effect like a revelation in the new appearance of the landscape.
Some men working madly at a battery were plain to
them, and the opposing infantry’s lines were defined by the
gray walls and fringes of smoke.
It seemed to the youth that he saw everything. Each blade
of the green grass was bold and clear. He thought that he was
aware of every change in the thin, transparent vapor that
floated idly in sheets. The brown or gray trunks of the trees
showed each roughness of their surfaces. And the men of the
regiment, with their starting eyes and sweating faces, running
madly, or falling, as if thrown headlong, to queer,
heaped-up corpses—all were comprehended. His mind took
a mechanical but firm impression, so that afterward everything
was pictured and explained to him, save why he himself
was there.
But there was a frenzy made from this furious rush. The
men, pitching forward insanely, had burst into cheerings,
moblike and barbaric, but tuned in strange keys that can
arouse the dullard2 and the stoic. It made a mad enthusiasm
that, it seemed, would be incapable of checking itself before
granite and brass. There was the delirium that encounters
despair and death, and is heedless and blind to the odds. It
is a temporary but sublime absence of selfishness. And
because it was of this order was the reason, perhaps, why the
youth wondered, afterward, what reasons he could have had
for being there.
Presently the straining pace ate up the energies of the
men. As if by agreement, the leaders began to slacken their
speed. The volleys directed against them had had a seeming
windlike effect. The regiment snorted and blew. Among
some stolid trees it began to falter and hesitate. The men,
staring intently, began to wait for some of the distant walls
of smoke to move and disclose to them the scene. Since
116 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
co • her • ent (co￣ hir´ənt) adj., logically
ordered; consistent
rev • e • la • tion (re və la´shən) n., act of
revealing or communicating divine truth
sto • ic (sto￣´ik) n., one apparently or professedly
indifferent to pleasure or pain
de • lir • i • um (di lir´e￣ əm) n., frenzied
excitement
_ What can be seen
once they charge into
a less smoke-filled
area?
_ What does the
youth seem to think
is happening to his
senses?
_ What are the men
encountering? What
are they “heedless”
to? What human
emotion do the men
become free of,
temporarily, in their
charge?
_ What happens as
soon as the regiment
slows their pace?
2. dullard. Stupid or unimaginative person
much of their strength and their breath had vanished, they
returned to caution. They were become men again.
The youth had a vague belief that he had run miles, and
he thought, in a way, that he was now in some new and
unknown land.
The moment the regiment ceased its advance the protesting
splutter of musketry became a steadied roar. Long and
accurate fringes of smoke spread out. From the top of a small
hill came level belchings of yellow flame that caused an
inhuman whistling in the air.
The men, halted, had opportunity to see some of their
comrades dropping with moans and shrieks. A few lay under
foot, still or wailing. And now for an instant the men stood,
their rifles slack in their hands, and watched the regiment
dwindle. They appeared dazed and stupid. This spectacle
seemed to paralyze them, overcome them with a fatal fascination.
They stared woodenly at the sights, and, lowering
their eyes, looked from face to face. It was a strange pause,
and a strange silence.
Then, above the sounds of the outside commotion, arose
the roar of the lieutenant. He strode suddenly forth, his
infantile features black with rage.
“Come on, yeh fools!” he bellowed. “Come on! Yeh can’t
stay here. Yeh must come on.” He said more, but much of it
could not be understood.
He started rapidly forward, with his head turned toward
the men. “Come on,” he was shouting. The men stared with
blank and yokel-like eyes at him. He was obliged to halt and
retrace his steps. He stood then with his back to the enemy
and delivered gigantic curses into the faces of the men. His
body vibrated from the weight and force of his imprecations.
And he could string oaths with the facility of a maiden who
strings beads.
The friend of the youth aroused. Lurching suddenly forward
and dropping to his knees, he fired an angry shot at the
persistent woods. This action awakened the men. They huddled
no more like sheep. They seemed suddenly to bethink
them of their weapons, and at once commenced firing.
Belabored by their officers, they began to move forward. The
regiment, involved like a cart involved in mud and muddle,
started unevenly with many jolts and jerks. The men
CHAPTER 19 117 WWords
For
Everyday
Use
be • la • bor (bi la￣´bər) vt., attack verbally
mud • dle (mə´d_l) n., confused mess
_ What happens to
the men halted in
front of enemy fire?
What do the men
seem to be unable to
do?
_ Who tries to urge
the men to move? Is
he successful at first?
_ What does the
youth’s friend do?
What is the effect of
this action on the
rest of the regiment?
stopped now every few paces to fire and load, and in this
manner moved slowly on from trees to trees.
The flaming opposition in their front grew with their
advance until it seemed that all forward ways were barred by
the thin leaping tongues, and off to the right an ominous
demonstration could sometimes be dimly discerned. The
smoke lately generated was in confusing clouds that made it
difficult for the regiment to proceed with intelligence. As he
passed through each curling mass the youth wondered what
would confront him on the farther side.
The command went painfully forward until an open space
interposed between them and the lurid lines. Here, crouching
and cowering behind some trees, the men clung with
desperation, as if threatened by a wave. They looked wildeyed,
and as if amazed at this furious disturbance they had
stirred. In the storm there was an ironical expression of their
importance. The faces of the men, too, showed a lack of certain
feeling of responsibility for being there. It was as if they
had been driven. It was the dominant animal failing to
remember in the supreme moments the forceful causes of
various superficial qualities. The whole affair seemed incomprehensible
to many of them.
As they halted thus the lieutenant again began to bellow
profanely. Regardless of the vindictive threats of the bullets,
he went about coaxing, berating, and bedamning. His lips,
that were habitually in a soft and childlike curve, were now
writhed into unholy contortions. He swore by all possible
deities.
Once he grabbed the youth by the arm. “Come on, yeh
lunkhead!” he roared. “Come on! We’ll all git killed if we stay
here. We’ve on’y got t’ go across that lot. An’ then”—the
remainder of his idea disappeared in a blue haze of curses.
The youth stretched forth his arm. “Cross there?” His
mouth was puckered in doubt and awe.
“Certainly. Jest ’cross th’ lot! We can’t stay here,”
screamed the lieutenant. He poked his face close to the
youth and waved his bandaged hand. “Come on!” Presently
he grappled with him as if for a wrestling bout. It was as if he
planned to drag the youth by the ear on to the assault.
The private felt a sudden unspeakable indignation against
his officer. He wrenched fiercely and shook him off.
118 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
dis • cern (di sərn´) vt., detect with the eyes
lu • rid (lur´əd) adj., shining with the red
glow of fire seen through smoke or cloud
be • rate (bi ra￣t´) vt., scold or condemn
strongly and at length
in • dig • na • tion (in dig na￣´shən) n.,
anger aroused by something unjust,
unworthy, or mean
_ What happens to
slow the regiment’s
forward progress?
_ What does the
lieutenant tell the
youth?
“Come on yerself, then,” he yelled. There was a bitter
challenge in his voice.
They galloped together down the regimental front. The
friend scrambled after them. In front of the colors the three
men began to bawl: “Come on! come on!” They danced and
gyrated like tortured savages.
The flag, obedient to these appeals, bended its glittering
form and swept toward them. The men wavered in indecision
for a moment, and then with a long, wailful cry the
dilapidated regiment surged forward and began its new journey.
Over the field went the scurrying mass. It was a handful
of men splattered into the faces of the enemy. Toward it
instantly sprang the yellow tongues. A vast quantity of blue
smoke hung before them. A mighty banging made ears valueless.
The youth ran like a madman to reach the woods before a
bullet could discover him. He ducked his head low, like a
football player. In his haste his eyes almost closed, and the
scene was a wild blur. Pulsating saliva stood at the corners of
his mouth.
Within him, as he hurled himself forward, was born a
love, a despairing fondness for this flag which was near him.
It was a creation of beauty and invulnerability. It was a goddess,
radiant, that bended its form with an imperious gesture
to him. It was a woman, red and white, hating and loving,
that called him with the voice of his hopes. Because no harm
could come to it he endowed it with power. He kept near, as
if it could be a saver of lives, and an imploring cry went from
his mind.
In the mad scramble he was aware that the color sergeant
flinched suddenly, as if struck by a bludgeon.3 He faltered,
and then became motionless, save for his quivering knees.
He made a spring and a clutch at the pole. At the same
instant his friend grabbed it from the other side. They jerked
at it, stout and furious, but the color sergeant was dead, and
the corpse would not relinquish its trust. For a moment there
was a grim encounter. The dead man, swinging with bended
CHAPTER 19 119
3. bludgeon. Short stick used as a weapon
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
gy • rate (j_￣´ra￣t) vi., swing with a circular or
spiral motion
in • vul • ner • a • bil • I • ty (in vəl nə rə
bi´lə te￣) n., quality of being immune to attack
im • pe • ri • ous (im pir´e￣ əs) adj., commanding;
intensely compelling
en • dow (en dau´) vt., provide with something
freely or naturally
re • lin • quish (ri liŋ´kwish) vt., give up
_ What challenge
does the youth offer
the lieutenant? What
do the youth, the
lieutenant, and the
youth’s friend do
then?
_ What do the three
men inspire the rest
of the regiment to
do? How do the
number of soldiers in
the regiment
compare to the
numbers of the
enemy?
_ How does the
youth feel about his
regiment’s flag?
What does it seem to
be to him?
_ What happens to
the color sergeant
who carries the flag?
What do the youth
and his friend do?
What does the dead

Presently, the regiment seemed to draw itself up and
heave a deep breath. None of the men’s faces were mirrors of
large thoughts. The soldiers were bended and stooped like
sprinters before a signal. Many pairs of glinting eyes peered
from the grimy faces toward the curtains of the deeper
woods. They seemed to be engaged in deep calculations of
time and distance.
CHAPTER 18 113 WWords
For
Everyday
Use
re • mon • strance (ri mən(t)´strən(t)s)
n., presentation of reasons for opposition
or complaint
en • gross • ing (en gro￣´siŋ) adj., occupying
the attention completely
sprint • er (sprint´ər) n., person who runs
a fast race for a short distance
_ What do the two
soldiers tell the
lieutenant when they
return? How does the
lieutenant feel about
this news?
_ What actions do
the officers take to
ready the soldiers for
battle?
They were surrounded by the noises of the monstrous
altercation between the two armies. The world was fully
interested in other matters. Apparently, the regiment had its
small affair to itself.The youth, turning, shot a quick, inquiring
glance at his friend. The latter returned to him the same
manner of look. They were the only ones who possessed an
inner knowledge. “Mule drivers—hell t’ pay—don’t believe
many will get back.” It was an ironical secret. Still, they saw
no hesitation in each other’s faces, and they nodded a mute
and unprotesting assent when a shaggy man near them said
in a meek voice: “We’ll git swallowed.”
114 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
as • sent (ə sent´) n., agreement; consent
_ What secret do
the youth and his
friend share?
Chapter 19
The youth stared at the land in front of him. Its foliages
now seemed to veil powers and horrors. He was unaware of
the machinery of orders that started the charge, although
from the corners of his eyes he saw an officer, who looked
like a boy a-horseback, come galloping, waving his hat.
Suddenly he felt a straining and heaving among the men.
The line fell slowly forward like a toppling wall, and, with a
convulsive gasp that was intended for a cheer, the regiment
began its journey. The youth was pushed and jostled for a
moment before he understood the movement at all, but
directly he lunged ahead and began to run.
He fixed his eye upon a distant and prominent clump of
trees where he had concluded the enemy were to be met, and
he ran toward it as toward a goal. He had believed throughout
that it was a mere question of getting over an unpleasant
matter as quickly as possible, and he ran desperately, as if
pursued for a murder. His face was drawn hard and tight with
the stress of his endeavor. His eyes were fixed in a lurid glare.
And with his soiled and disordered dress, his red and
inflamed features surmounted by the dingy rag with its spot
of blood, his wildly swinging rifle and banging accouterments,
he looked to be an insane soldier.
As the regiment swung from its position out into a cleared
space the woods and thickets before it awakened. Yellow
flames leaped toward it from many directions. The forest
made a tremendous objection.
The line lurched straight for a moment. Then the right
wing1 swung forward; it in turn was surpassed by the left.
Afterward the center careered to the front until the regiment
was a wedge-shaped mass, but an instant later the opposition
of the bushes, trees, and uneven places on the ground split
the command and scattered it into detached clusters.
The youth, light-footed, was unconsciously in advance.
His eyes still kept note of the clump of trees. From all places
near it the clannish yell of the enemy could be heard. The little
flames of rifles leaped from it. The song of the bullets was
CHAPTER 19 115
1. wing. Section of an army to the right or to the left
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
con • vul • sive (kən vəl´siv) adj., violent,
sudden, frantic, or spasmodic
sur • mount (sər maunt´) vt., stand or lie at
the top of
ac • cou • tre • ment or ac • cou • ter •
ment (ə ko—_o´trə mənt) n., equipment, trappings
clan • nish (kla´nish) adj., of or relating to
a close group
_ What does the
youth’s regiment
begin to do?
_ In what direction
does the youth run?
What is his attitude
toward the charge?
_ What makes the
youth look like an
“insane soldier”?
_ What happens as
the regiment runs
into a “cleared
space”?
in the air and shells snarled among the treetops. One tumbled
directly into the middle of a hurrying group and exploded in
crimson fury. There was an instant’s spectacle of a man,
almost over it, throwing up his hands to shield his eyes.
Other men, punched by bullets, fell in grotesque agonies.
The regiment left a coherent trail of bodies.
They had passed into a clearer atmosphere. There was an
effect like a revelation in the new appearance of the landscape.
Some men working madly at a battery were plain to
them, and the opposing infantry’s lines were defined by the
gray walls and fringes of smoke.
It seemed to the youth that he saw everything. Each blade
of the green grass was bold and clear. He thought that he was
aware of every change in the thin, transparent vapor that
floated idly in sheets. The brown or gray trunks of the trees
showed each roughness of their surfaces. And the men of the
regiment, with their starting eyes and sweating faces, running
madly, or falling, as if thrown headlong, to queer,
heaped-up corpses—all were comprehended. His mind took
a mechanical but firm impression, so that afterward everything
was pictured and explained to him, save why he himself
was there.
But there was a frenzy made from this furious rush. The
men, pitching forward insanely, had burst into cheerings,
moblike and barbaric, but tuned in strange keys that can
arouse the dullard2 and the stoic. It made a mad enthusiasm
that, it seemed, would be incapable of checking itself before
granite and brass. There was the delirium that encounters
despair and death, and is heedless and blind to the odds. It
is a temporary but sublime absence of selfishness. And
because it was of this order was the reason, perhaps, why the
youth wondered, afterward, what reasons he could have had
for being there.
Presently the straining pace ate up the energies of the
men. As if by agreement, the leaders began to slacken their
speed. The volleys directed against them had had a seeming
windlike effect. The regiment snorted and blew. Among
some stolid trees it began to falter and hesitate. The men,
staring intently, began to wait for some of the distant walls
of smoke to move and disclose to them the scene. Since
116 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
co • her • ent (co￣ hir´ənt) adj., logically
ordered; consistent
rev • e • la • tion (re və la´shən) n., act of
revealing or communicating divine truth
sto • ic (sto￣´ik) n., one apparently or professedly
indifferent to pleasure or pain
de • lir • i • um (di lir´e￣ əm) n., frenzied
excitement
_ What can be seen
once they charge into
a less smoke-filled
area?
_ What does the
youth seem to think
is happening to his
senses?
_ What are the men
encountering? What
are they “heedless”
to? What human
emotion do the men
become free of,
temporarily, in their
charge?
_ What happens as
soon as the regiment
slows their pace?
2. dullard. Stupid or unimaginative person
much of their strength and their breath had vanished, they
returned to caution. They were become men again.
The youth had a vague belief that he had run miles, and
he thought, in a way, that he was now in some new and
unknown land.
The moment the regiment ceased its advance the protesting
splutter of musketry became a steadied roar. Long and
accurate fringes of smoke spread out. From the top of a small
hill came level belchings of yellow flame that caused an
inhuman whistling in the air.
The men, halted, had opportunity to see some of their
comrades dropping with moans and shrieks. A few lay under
foot, still or wailing. And now for an instant the men stood,
their rifles slack in their hands, and watched the regiment
dwindle. They appeared dazed and stupid. This spectacle
seemed to paralyze them, overcome them with a fatal fascination.
They stared woodenly at the sights, and, lowering
their eyes, looked from face to face. It was a strange pause,
and a strange silence.
Then, above the sounds of the outside commotion, arose
the roar of the lieutenant. He strode suddenly forth, his
infantile features black with rage.
“Come on, yeh fools!” he bellowed. “Come on! Yeh can’t
stay here. Yeh must come on.” He said more, but much of it
could not be understood.
He started rapidly forward, with his head turned toward
the men. “Come on,” he was shouting. The men stared with
blank and yokel-like eyes at him. He was obliged to halt and
retrace his steps. He stood then with his back to the enemy
and delivered gigantic curses into the faces of the men. His
body vibrated from the weight and force of his imprecations.
And he could string oaths with the facility of a maiden who
strings beads.
The friend of the youth aroused. Lurching suddenly forward
and dropping to his knees, he fired an angry shot at the
persistent woods. This action awakened the men. They huddled
no more like sheep. They seemed suddenly to bethink
them of their weapons, and at once commenced firing.
Belabored by their officers, they began to move forward. The
regiment, involved like a cart involved in mud and muddle,
started unevenly with many jolts and jerks. The men
CHAPTER 19 117 WWords
For
Everyday
Use
be • la • bor (bi la￣´bər) vt., attack verbally
mud • dle (mə´d_l) n., confused mess
_ What happens to
the men halted in
front of enemy fire?
What do the men
seem to be unable to
do?
_ Who tries to urge
the men to move? Is
he successful at first?
_ What does the
youth’s friend do?
What is the effect of
this action on the
rest of the regiment?
stopped now every few paces to fire and load, and in this
manner moved slowly on from trees to trees.
The flaming opposition in their front grew with their
advance until it seemed that all forward ways were barred by
the thin leaping tongues, and off to the right an ominous
demonstration could sometimes be dimly discerned. The
smoke lately generated was in confusing clouds that made it
difficult for the regiment to proceed with intelligence. As he
passed through each curling mass the youth wondered what
would confront him on the farther side.
The command went painfully forward until an open space
interposed between them and the lurid lines. Here, crouching
and cowering behind some trees, the men clung with
desperation, as if threatened by a wave. They looked wildeyed,
and as if amazed at this furious disturbance they had
stirred. In the storm there was an ironical expression of their
importance. The faces of the men, too, showed a lack of certain
feeling of responsibility for being there. It was as if they
had been driven. It was the dominant animal failing to
remember in the supreme moments the forceful causes of
various superficial qualities. The whole affair seemed incomprehensible
to many of them.
As they halted thus the lieutenant again began to bellow
profanely. Regardless of the vindictive threats of the bullets,
he went about coaxing, berating, and bedamning. His lips,
that were habitually in a soft and childlike curve, were now
writhed into unholy contortions. He swore by all possible
deities.
Once he grabbed the youth by the arm. “Come on, yeh
lunkhead!” he roared. “Come on! We’ll all git killed if we stay
here. We’ve on’y got t’ go across that lot. An’ then”—the
remainder of his idea disappeared in a blue haze of curses.
The youth stretched forth his arm. “Cross there?” His
mouth was puckered in doubt and awe.
“Certainly. Jest ’cross th’ lot! We can’t stay here,”
screamed the lieutenant. He poked his face close to the
youth and waved his bandaged hand. “Come on!” Presently
he grappled with him as if for a wrestling bout. It was as if he
planned to drag the youth by the ear on to the assault.
The private felt a sudden unspeakable indignation against
his officer. He wrenched fiercely and shook him off.
118 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
dis • cern (di sərn´) vt., detect with the eyes
lu • rid (lur´əd) adj., shining with the red
glow of fire seen through smoke or cloud
be • rate (bi ra￣t´) vt., scold or condemn
strongly and at length
in • dig • na • tion (in dig na￣´shən) n.,
anger aroused by something unjust,
unworthy, or mean
_ What happens to
slow the regiment’s
forward progress?
_ What does the
lieutenant tell the
youth?
“Come on yerself, then,” he yelled. There was a bitter
challenge in his voice.
They galloped together down the regimental front. The
friend scrambled after them. In front of the colors the three
men began to bawl: “Come on! come on!” They danced and
gyrated like tortured savages.
The flag, obedient to these appeals, bended its glittering
form and swept toward them. The men wavered in indecision
for a moment, and then with a long, wailful cry the
dilapidated regiment surged forward and began its new journey.
Over the field went the scurrying mass. It was a handful
of men splattered into the faces of the enemy. Toward it
instantly sprang the yellow tongues. A vast quantity of blue
smoke hung before them. A mighty banging made ears valueless.
The youth ran like a madman to reach the woods before a
bullet could discover him. He ducked his head low, like a
football player. In his haste his eyes almost closed, and the
scene was a wild blur. Pulsating saliva stood at the corners of
his mouth.
Within him, as he hurled himself forward, was born a
love, a despairing fondness for this flag which was near him.
It was a creation of beauty and invulnerability. It was a goddess,
radiant, that bended its form with an imperious gesture
to him. It was a woman, red and white, hating and loving,
that called him with the voice of his hopes. Because no harm
could come to it he endowed it with power. He kept near, as
if it could be a saver of lives, and an imploring cry went from
his mind.
In the mad scramble he was aware that the color sergeant
flinched suddenly, as if struck by a bludgeon.3 He faltered,
and then became motionless, save for his quivering knees.
He made a spring and a clutch at the pole. At the same
instant his friend grabbed it from the other side. They jerked
at it, stout and furious, but the color sergeant was dead, and
the corpse would not relinquish its trust. For a moment there
was a grim encounter. The dead man, swinging with bended
CHAPTER 19 119
3. bludgeon. Short stick used as a weapon
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
gy • rate (j_￣´ra￣t) vi., swing with a circular or
spiral motion
in • vul • ner • a • bil • I • ty (in vəl nə rə
bi´lə te￣) n., quality of being immune to attack
im • pe • ri • ous (im pir´e￣ əs) adj., commanding;
intensely compelling
en • dow (en dau´) vt., provide with something
freely or naturally
re • lin • quish (ri liŋ´kwish) vt., give up
_ What challenge
does the youth offer
the lieutenant? What
do the youth, the
lieutenant, and the
youth’s friend do
then?
_ What do the three
men inspire the rest
of the regiment to
do? How do the
number of soldiers in
the regiment
compare to the
numbers of the
enemy?
_ How does the
youth feel about his
regiment’s flag?
What does it seem to
be to him?
_ What happens to
the color sergeant
who carries the flag?
What do the youth
and his friend do?
What does the dead

Presently, the regiment seemed to draw itself up and
heave a deep breath. None of the men’s faces were mirrors of
large thoughts. The soldiers were bended and stooped like
sprinters before a signal. Many pairs of glinting eyes peered
from the grimy faces toward the curtains of the deeper
woods. They seemed to be engaged in deep calculations of
time and distance.
CHAPTER 18 113 WWords
For
Everyday
Use
re • mon • strance (ri mən(t)´strən(t)s)
n., presentation of reasons for opposition
or complaint
en • gross • ing (en gro￣´siŋ) adj., occupying
the attention completely
sprint • er (sprint´ər) n., person who runs
a fast race for a short distance
_ What do the two
soldiers tell the
lieutenant when they
return? How does the
lieutenant feel about
this news?
_ What actions do
the officers take to
ready the soldiers for
battle?
They were surrounded by the noises of the monstrous
altercation between the two armies. The world was fully
interested in other matters. Apparently, the regiment had its
small affair to itself.The youth, turning, shot a quick, inquiring
glance at his friend. The latter returned to him the same
manner of look. They were the only ones who possessed an
inner knowledge. “Mule drivers—hell t’ pay—don’t believe
many will get back.” It was an ironical secret. Still, they saw
no hesitation in each other’s faces, and they nodded a mute
and unprotesting assent when a shaggy man near them said
in a meek voice: “We’ll git swallowed.”
114 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
as • sent (ə sent´) n., agreement; consent
_ What secret do
the youth and his
friend share?
Chapter 19
The youth stared at the land in front of him. Its foliages
now seemed to veil powers and horrors. He was unaware of
the machinery of orders that started the charge, although
from the corners of his eyes he saw an officer, who looked
like a boy a-horseback, come galloping, waving his hat.
Suddenly he felt a straining and heaving among the men.
The line fell slowly forward like a toppling wall, and, with a
convulsive gasp that was intended for a cheer, the regiment
began its journey. The youth was pushed and jostled for a
moment before he understood the movement at all, but
directly he lunged ahead and began to run.
He fixed his eye upon a distant and prominent clump of
trees where he had concluded the enemy were to be met, and
he ran toward it as toward a goal. He had believed throughout
that it was a mere question of getting over an unpleasant
matter as quickly as possible, and he ran desperately, as if
pursued for a murder. His face was drawn hard and tight with
the stress of his endeavor. His eyes were fixed in a lurid glare.
And with his soiled and disordered dress, his red and
inflamed features surmounted by the dingy rag with its spot
of blood, his wildly swinging rifle and banging accouterments,
he looked to be an insane soldier.
As the regiment swung from its position out into a cleared
space the woods and thickets before it awakened. Yellow
flames leaped toward it from many directions. The forest
made a tremendous objection.
The line lurched straight for a moment. Then the right
wing1 swung forward; it in turn was surpassed by the left.
Afterward the center careered to the front until the regiment
was a wedge-shaped mass, but an instant later the opposition
of the bushes, trees, and uneven places on the ground split
the command and scattered it into detached clusters.
The youth, light-footed, was unconsciously in advance.
His eyes still kept note of the clump of trees. From all places
near it the clannish yell of the enemy could be heard. The little
flames of rifles leaped from it. The song of the bullets was
CHAPTER 19 115
1. wing. Section of an army to the right or to the left
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
con • vul • sive (kən vəl´siv) adj., violent,
sudden, frantic, or spasmodic
sur • mount (sər maunt´) vt., stand or lie at
the top of
ac • cou • tre • ment or ac • cou • ter •
ment (ə ko—_o´trə mənt) n., equipment, trappings
clan • nish (kla´nish) adj., of or relating to
a close group
_ What does the
youth’s regiment
begin to do?
_ In what direction
does the youth run?
What is his attitude
toward the charge?
_ What makes the
youth look like an
“insane soldier”?
_ What happens as
the regiment runs
into a “cleared
space”?
in the air and shells snarled among the treetops. One tumbled
directly into the middle of a hurrying group and exploded in
crimson fury. There was an instant’s spectacle of a man,
almost over it, throwing up his hands to shield his eyes.
Other men, punched by bullets, fell in grotesque agonies.
The regiment left a coherent trail of bodies.
They had passed into a clearer atmosphere. There was an
effect like a revelation in the new appearance of the landscape.
Some men working madly at a battery were plain to
them, and the opposing infantry’s lines were defined by the
gray walls and fringes of smoke.
It seemed to the youth that he saw everything. Each blade
of the green grass was bold and clear. He thought that he was
aware of every change in the thin, transparent vapor that
floated idly in sheets. The brown or gray trunks of the trees
showed each roughness of their surfaces. And the men of the
regiment, with their starting eyes and sweating faces, running
madly, or falling, as if thrown headlong, to queer,
heaped-up corpses—all were comprehended. His mind took
a mechanical but firm impression, so that afterward everything
was pictured and explained to him, save why he himself
was there.
But there was a frenzy made from this furious rush. The
men, pitching forward insanely, had burst into cheerings,
moblike and barbaric, but tuned in strange keys that can
arouse the dullard2 and the stoic. It made a mad enthusiasm
that, it seemed, would be incapable of checking itself before
granite and brass. There was the delirium that encounters
despair and death, and is heedless and blind to the odds. It
is a temporary but sublime absence of selfishness. And
because it was of this order was the reason, perhaps, why the
youth wondered, afterward, what reasons he could have had
for being there.
Presently the straining pace ate up the energies of the
men. As if by agreement, the leaders began to slacken their
speed. The volleys directed against them had had a seeming
windlike effect. The regiment snorted and blew. Among
some stolid trees it began to falter and hesitate. The men,
staring intently, began to wait for some of the distant walls
of smoke to move and disclose to them the scene. Since
116 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
co • her • ent (co￣ hir´ənt) adj., logically
ordered; consistent
rev • e • la • tion (re və la´shən) n., act of
revealing or communicating divine truth
sto • ic (sto￣´ik) n., one apparently or professedly
indifferent to pleasure or pain
de • lir • i • um (di lir´e￣ əm) n., frenzied
excitement
_ What can be seen
once they charge into
a less smoke-filled
area?
_ What does the
youth seem to think
is happening to his
senses?
_ What are the men
encountering? What
are they “heedless”
to? What human
emotion do the men
become free of,
temporarily, in their
charge?
_ What happens as
soon as the regiment
slows their pace?
2. dullard. Stupid or unimaginative person
much of their strength and their breath had vanished, they
returned to caution. They were become men again.
The youth had a vague belief that he had run miles, and
he thought, in a way, that he was now in some new and
unknown land.
The moment the regiment ceased its advance the protesting
splutter of musketry became a steadied roar. Long and
accurate fringes of smoke spread out. From the top of a small
hill came level belchings of yellow flame that caused an
inhuman whistling in the air.
The men, halted, had opportunity to see some of their
comrades dropping with moans and shrieks. A few lay under
foot, still or wailing. And now for an instant the men stood,
their rifles slack in their hands, and watched the regiment
dwindle. They appeared dazed and stupid. This spectacle
seemed to paralyze them, overcome them with a fatal fascination.
They stared woodenly at the sights, and, lowering
their eyes, looked from face to face. It was a strange pause,
and a strange silence.
Then, above the sounds of the outside commotion, arose
the roar of the lieutenant. He strode suddenly forth, his
infantile features black with rage.
“Come on, yeh fools!” he bellowed. “Come on! Yeh can’t
stay here. Yeh must come on.” He said more, but much of it
could not be understood.
He started rapidly forward, with his head turned toward
the men. “Come on,” he was shouting. The men stared with
blank and yokel-like eyes at him. He was obliged to halt and
retrace his steps. He stood then with his back to the enemy
and delivered gigantic curses into the faces of the men. His
body vibrated from the weight and force of his imprecations.
And he could string oaths with the facility of a maiden who
strings beads.
The friend of the youth aroused. Lurching suddenly forward
and dropping to his knees, he fired an angry shot at the
persistent woods. This action awakened the men. They huddled
no more like sheep. They seemed suddenly to bethink
them of their weapons, and at once commenced firing.
Belabored by their officers, they began to move forward. The
regiment, involved like a cart involved in mud and muddle,
started unevenly with many jolts and jerks. The men
CHAPTER 19 117 WWords
For
Everyday
Use
be • la • bor (bi la￣´bər) vt., attack verbally
mud • dle (mə´d_l) n., confused mess
_ What happens to
the men halted in
front of enemy fire?
What do the men
seem to be unable to
do?
_ Who tries to urge
the men to move? Is
he successful at first?
_ What does the
youth’s friend do?
What is the effect of
this action on the
rest of the regiment?
stopped now every few paces to fire and load, and in this
manner moved slowly on from trees to trees.
The flaming opposition in their front grew with their
advance until it seemed that all forward ways were barred by
the thin leaping tongues, and off to the right an ominous
demonstration could sometimes be dimly discerned. The
smoke lately generated was in confusing clouds that made it
difficult for the regiment to proceed with intelligence. As he
passed through each curling mass the youth wondered what
would confront him on the farther side.
The command went painfully forward until an open space
interposed between them and the lurid lines. Here, crouching
and cowering behind some trees, the men clung with
desperation, as if threatened by a wave. They looked wildeyed,
and as if amazed at this furious disturbance they had
stirred. In the storm there was an ironical expression of their
importance. The faces of the men, too, showed a lack of certain
feeling of responsibility for being there. It was as if they
had been driven. It was the dominant animal failing to
remember in the supreme moments the forceful causes of
various superficial qualities. The whole affair seemed incomprehensible
to many of them.
As they halted thus the lieutenant again began to bellow
profanely. Regardless of the vindictive threats of the bullets,
he went about coaxing, berating, and bedamning. His lips,
that were habitually in a soft and childlike curve, were now
writhed into unholy contortions. He swore by all possible
deities.
Once he grabbed the youth by the arm. “Come on, yeh
lunkhead!” he roared. “Come on! We’ll all git killed if we stay
here. We’ve on’y got t’ go across that lot. An’ then”—the
remainder of his idea disappeared in a blue haze of curses.
The youth stretched forth his arm. “Cross there?” His
mouth was puckered in doubt and awe.
“Certainly. Jest ’cross th’ lot! We can’t stay here,”
screamed the lieutenant. He poked his face close to the
youth and waved his bandaged hand. “Come on!” Presently
he grappled with him as if for a wrestling bout. It was as if he
planned to drag the youth by the ear on to the assault.
The private felt a sudden unspeakable indignation against
his officer. He wrenched fiercely and shook him off.
118 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
dis • cern (di sərn´) vt., detect with the eyes
lu • rid (lur´əd) adj., shining with the red
glow of fire seen through smoke or cloud
be • rate (bi ra￣t´) vt., scold or condemn
strongly and at length
in • dig • na • tion (in dig na￣´shən) n.,
anger aroused by something unjust,
unworthy, or mean
_ What happens to
slow the regiment’s
forward progress?
_ What does the
lieutenant tell the
youth?
“Come on yerself, then,” he yelled. There was a bitter
challenge in his voice.
They galloped together down the regimental front. The
friend scrambled after them. In front of the colors the three
men began to bawl: “Come on! come on!” They danced and
gyrated like tortured savages.
The flag, obedient to these appeals, bended its glittering
form and swept toward them. The men wavered in indecision
for a moment, and then with a long, wailful cry the
dilapidated regiment surged forward and began its new journey.
Over the field went the scurrying mass. It was a handful
of men splattered into the faces of the enemy. Toward it
instantly sprang the yellow tongues. A vast quantity of blue
smoke hung before them. A mighty banging made ears valueless.
The youth ran like a madman to reach the woods before a
bullet could discover him. He ducked his head low, like a
football player. In his haste his eyes almost closed, and the
scene was a wild blur. Pulsating saliva stood at the corners of
his mouth.
Within him, as he hurled himself forward, was born a
love, a despairing fondness for this flag which was near him.
It was a creation of beauty and invulnerability. It was a goddess,
radiant, that bended its form with an imperious gesture
to him. It was a woman, red and white, hating and loving,
that called him with the voice of his hopes. Because no harm
could come to it he endowed it with power. He kept near, as
if it could be a saver of lives, and an imploring cry went from
his mind.
In the mad scramble he was aware that the color sergeant
flinched suddenly, as if struck by a bludgeon.3 He faltered,
and then became motionless, save for his quivering knees.
He made a spring and a clutch at the pole. At the same
instant his friend grabbed it from the other side. They jerked
at it, stout and furious, but the color sergeant was dead, and
the corpse would not relinquish its trust. For a moment there
was a grim encounter. The dead man, swinging with bended
CHAPTER 19 119
3. bludgeon. Short stick used as a weapon
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
gy • rate (j_￣´ra￣t) vi., swing with a circular or
spiral motion
in • vul • ner • a • bil • I • ty (in vəl nə rə
bi´lə te￣) n., quality of being immune to attack
im • pe • ri • ous (im pir´e￣ əs) adj., commanding;
intensely compelling
en • dow (en dau´) vt., provide with something
freely or naturally
re • lin • quish (ri liŋ´kwish) vt., give up
_ What challenge
does the youth offer
the lieutenant? What
do the youth, the
lieutenant, and the
youth’s friend do
then?
_ What do the three
men inspire the rest
of the regiment to
do? How do the
number of soldiers in
the regiment
compare to the
numbers of the
enemy?
_ How does the
youth feel about his
regiment’s flag?
What does it seem to
be to him?
_ What happens to
the color sergeant
who carries the flag?
What do the youth
and his friend do?
What does the dead

Presently, the regiment seemed to draw itself up and
heave a deep breath. None of the men’s faces were mirrors of
large thoughts. The soldiers were bended and stooped like
sprinters before a signal. Many pairs of glinting eyes peered
from the grimy faces toward the curtains of the deeper
woods. They seemed to be engaged in deep calculations of
time and distance.
CHAPTER 18 113 WWords
For
Everyday
Use
re • mon • strance (ri mən(t)´strən(t)s)
n., presentation of reasons for opposition
or complaint
en • gross • ing (en gro￣´siŋ) adj., occupying
the attention completely
sprint • er (sprint´ər) n., person who runs
a fast race for a short distance
_ What do the two
soldiers tell the
lieutenant when they
return? How does the
lieutenant feel about
this news?
_ What actions do
the officers take to
ready the soldiers for
battle?
They were surrounded by the noises of the monstrous
altercation between the two armies. The world was fully
interested in other matters. Apparently, the regiment had its
small affair to itself.The youth, turning, shot a quick, inquiring
glance at his friend. The latter returned to him the same
manner of look. They were the only ones who possessed an
inner knowledge. “Mule drivers—hell t’ pay—don’t believe
many will get back.” It was an ironical secret. Still, they saw
no hesitation in each other’s faces, and they nodded a mute
and unprotesting assent when a shaggy man near them said
in a meek voice: “We’ll git swallowed.”
114 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
as • sent (ə sent´) n., agreement; consent
_ What secret do
the youth and his
friend share?
Chapter 19
The youth stared at the land in front of him. Its foliages
now seemed to veil powers and horrors. He was unaware of
the machinery of orders that started the charge, although
from the corners of his eyes he saw an officer, who looked
like a boy a-horseback, come galloping, waving his hat.
Suddenly he felt a straining and heaving among the men.
The line fell slowly forward like a toppling wall, and, with a
convulsive gasp that was intended for a cheer, the regiment
began its journey. The youth was pushed and jostled for a
moment before he understood the movement at all, but
directly he lunged ahead and began to run.
He fixed his eye upon a distant and prominent clump of
trees where he had concluded the enemy were to be met, and
he ran toward it as toward a goal. He had believed throughout
that it was a mere question of getting over an unpleasant
matter as quickly as possible, and he ran desperately, as if
pursued for a murder. His face was drawn hard and tight with
the stress of his endeavor. His eyes were fixed in a lurid glare.
And with his soiled and disordered dress, his red and
inflamed features surmounted by the dingy rag with its spot
of blood, his wildly swinging rifle and banging accouterments,
he looked to be an insane soldier.
As the regiment swung from its position out into a cleared
space the woods and thickets before it awakened. Yellow
flames leaped toward it from many directions. The forest
made a tremendous objection.
The line lurched straight for a moment. Then the right
wing1 swung forward; it in turn was surpassed by the left.
Afterward the center careered to the front until the regiment
was a wedge-shaped mass, but an instant later the opposition
of the bushes, trees, and uneven places on the ground split
the command and scattered it into detached clusters.
The youth, light-footed, was unconsciously in advance.
His eyes still kept note of the clump of trees. From all places
near it the clannish yell of the enemy could be heard. The little
flames of rifles leaped from it. The song of the bullets was
CHAPTER 19 115
1. wing. Section of an army to the right or to the left
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
con • vul • sive (kən vəl´siv) adj., violent,
sudden, frantic, or spasmodic
sur • mount (sər maunt´) vt., stand or lie at
the top of
ac • cou • tre • ment or ac • cou • ter •
ment (ə ko—_o´trə mənt) n., equipment, trappings
clan • nish (kla´nish) adj., of or relating to
a close group
_ What does the
youth’s regiment
begin to do?
_ In what direction
does the youth run?
What is his attitude
toward the charge?
_ What makes the
youth look like an
“insane soldier”?
_ What happens as
the regiment runs
into a “cleared
space”?
in the air and shells snarled among the treetops. One tumbled
directly into the middle of a hurrying group and exploded in
crimson fury. There was an instant’s spectacle of a man,
almost over it, throwing up his hands to shield his eyes.
Other men, punched by bullets, fell in grotesque agonies.
The regiment left a coherent trail of bodies.
They had passed into a clearer atmosphere. There was an
effect like a revelation in the new appearance of the landscape.
Some men working madly at a battery were plain to
them, and the opposing infantry’s lines were defined by the
gray walls and fringes of smoke.
It seemed to the youth that he saw everything. Each blade
of the green grass was bold and clear. He thought that he was
aware of every change in the thin, transparent vapor that
floated idly in sheets. The brown or gray trunks of the trees
showed each roughness of their surfaces. And the men of the
regiment, with their starting eyes and sweating faces, running
madly, or falling, as if thrown headlong, to queer,
heaped-up corpses—all were comprehended. His mind took
a mechanical but firm impression, so that afterward everything
was pictured and explained to him, save why he himself
was there.
But there was a frenzy made from this furious rush. The
men, pitching forward insanely, had burst into cheerings,
moblike and barbaric, but tuned in strange keys that can
arouse the dullard2 and the stoic. It made a mad enthusiasm
that, it seemed, would be incapable of checking itself before
granite and brass. There was the delirium that encounters
despair and death, and is heedless and blind to the odds. It
is a temporary but sublime absence of selfishness. And
because it was of this order was the reason, perhaps, why the
youth wondered, afterward, what reasons he could have had
for being there.
Presently the straining pace ate up the energies of the
men. As if by agreement, the leaders began to slacken their
speed. The volleys directed against them had had a seeming
windlike effect. The regiment snorted and blew. Among
some stolid trees it began to falter and hesitate. The men,
staring intently, began to wait for some of the distant walls
of smoke to move and disclose to them the scene. Since
116 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
co • her • ent (co￣ hir´ənt) adj., logically
ordered; consistent
rev • e • la • tion (re və la´shən) n., act of
revealing or communicating divine truth
sto • ic (sto￣´ik) n., one apparently or professedly
indifferent to pleasure or pain
de • lir • i • um (di lir´e￣ əm) n., frenzied
excitement
_ What can be seen
once they charge into
a less smoke-filled
area?
_ What does the
youth seem to think
is happening to his
senses?
_ What are the men
encountering? What
are they “heedless”
to? What human
emotion do the men
become free of,
temporarily, in their
charge?
_ What happens as
soon as the regiment
slows their pace?
2. dullard. Stupid or unimaginative person
much of their strength and their breath had vanished, they
returned to caution. They were become men again.
The youth had a vague belief that he had run miles, and
he thought, in a way, that he was now in some new and
unknown land.
The moment the regiment ceased its advance the protesting
splutter of musketry became a steadied roar. Long and
accurate fringes of smoke spread out. From the top of a small
hill came level belchings of yellow flame that caused an
inhuman whistling in the air.
The men, halted, had opportunity to see some of their
comrades dropping with moans and shrieks. A few lay under
foot, still or wailing. And now for an instant the men stood,
their rifles slack in their hands, and watched the regiment
dwindle. They appeared dazed and stupid. This spectacle
seemed to paralyze them, overcome them with a fatal fascination.
They stared woodenly at the sights, and, lowering
their eyes, looked from face to face. It was a strange pause,
and a strange silence.
Then, above the sounds of the outside commotion, arose
the roar of the lieutenant. He strode suddenly forth, his
infantile features black with rage.
“Come on, yeh fools!” he bellowed. “Come on! Yeh can’t
stay here. Yeh must come on.” He said more, but much of it
could not be understood.
He started rapidly forward, with his head turned toward
the men. “Come on,” he was shouting. The men stared with
blank and yokel-like eyes at him. He was obliged to halt and
retrace his steps. He stood then with his back to the enemy
and delivered gigantic curses into the faces of the men. His
body vibrated from the weight and force of his imprecations.
And he could string oaths with the facility of a maiden who
strings beads.
The friend of the youth aroused. Lurching suddenly forward
and dropping to his knees, he fired an angry shot at the
persistent woods. This action awakened the men. They huddled
no more like sheep. They seemed suddenly to bethink
them of their weapons, and at once commenced firing.
Belabored by their officers, they began to move forward. The
regiment, involved like a cart involved in mud and muddle,
started unevenly with many jolts and jerks. The men
CHAPTER 19 117 WWords
For
Everyday
Use
be • la • bor (bi la￣´bər) vt., attack verbally
mud • dle (mə´d_l) n., confused mess
_ What happens to
the men halted in
front of enemy fire?
What do the men
seem to be unable to
do?
_ Who tries to urge
the men to move? Is
he successful at first?
_ What does the
youth’s friend do?
What is the effect of
this action on the
rest of the regiment?
stopped now every few paces to fire and load, and in this
manner moved slowly on from trees to trees.
The flaming opposition in their front grew with their
advance until it seemed that all forward ways were barred by
the thin leaping tongues, and off to the right an ominous
demonstration could sometimes be dimly discerned. The
smoke lately generated was in confusing clouds that made it
difficult for the regiment to proceed with intelligence. As he
passed through each curling mass the youth wondered what
would confront him on the farther side.
The command went painfully forward until an open space
interposed between them and the lurid lines. Here, crouching
and cowering behind some trees, the men clung with
desperation, as if threatened by a wave. They looked wildeyed,
and as if amazed at this furious disturbance they had
stirred. In the storm there was an ironical expression of their
importance. The faces of the men, too, showed a lack of certain
feeling of responsibility for being there. It was as if they
had been driven. It was the dominant animal failing to
remember in the supreme moments the forceful causes of
various superficial qualities. The whole affair seemed incomprehensible
to many of them.
As they halted thus the lieutenant again began to bellow
profanely. Regardless of the vindictive threats of the bullets,
he went about coaxing, berating, and bedamning. His lips,
that were habitually in a soft and childlike curve, were now
writhed into unholy contortions. He swore by all possible
deities.
Once he grabbed the youth by the arm. “Come on, yeh
lunkhead!” he roared. “Come on! We’ll all git killed if we stay
here. We’ve on’y got t’ go across that lot. An’ then”—the
remainder of his idea disappeared in a blue haze of curses.
The youth stretched forth his arm. “Cross there?” His
mouth was puckered in doubt and awe.
“Certainly. Jest ’cross th’ lot! We can’t stay here,”
screamed the lieutenant. He poked his face close to the
youth and waved his bandaged hand. “Come on!” Presently
he grappled with him as if for a wrestling bout. It was as if he
planned to drag the youth by the ear on to the assault.
The private felt a sudden unspeakable indignation against
his officer. He wrenched fiercely and shook him off.
118 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
dis • cern (di sərn´) vt., detect with the eyes
lu • rid (lur´əd) adj., shining with the red
glow of fire seen through smoke or cloud
be • rate (bi ra￣t´) vt., scold or condemn
strongly and at length
in • dig • na • tion (in dig na￣´shən) n.,
anger aroused by something unjust,
unworthy, or mean
_ What happens to
slow the regiment’s
forward progress?
_ What does the
lieutenant tell the
youth?
“Come on yerself, then,” he yelled. There was a bitter
challenge in his voice.
They galloped together down the regimental front. The
friend scrambled after them. In front of the colors the three
men began to bawl: “Come on! come on!” They danced and
gyrated like tortured savages.
The flag, obedient to these appeals, bended its glittering
form and swept toward them. The men wavered in indecision
for a moment, and then with a long, wailful cry the
dilapidated regiment surged forward and began its new journey.
Over the field went the scurrying mass. It was a handful
of men splattered into the faces of the enemy. Toward it
instantly sprang the yellow tongues. A vast quantity of blue
smoke hung before them. A mighty banging made ears valueless.
The youth ran like a madman to reach the woods before a
bullet could discover him. He ducked his head low, like a
football player. In his haste his eyes almost closed, and the
scene was a wild blur. Pulsating saliva stood at the corners of
his mouth.
Within him, as he hurled himself forward, was born a
love, a despairing fondness for this flag which was near him.
It was a creation of beauty and invulnerability. It was a goddess,
radiant, that bended its form with an imperious gesture
to him. It was a woman, red and white, hating and loving,
that called him with the voice of his hopes. Because no harm
could come to it he endowed it with power. He kept near, as
if it could be a saver of lives, and an imploring cry went from
his mind.
In the mad scramble he was aware that the color sergeant
flinched suddenly, as if struck by a bludgeon.3 He faltered,
and then became motionless, save for his quivering knees.
He made a spring and a clutch at the pole. At the same
instant his friend grabbed it from the other side. They jerked
at it, stout and furious, but the color sergeant was dead, and
the corpse would not relinquish its trust. For a moment there
was a grim encounter. The dead man, swinging with bended
CHAPTER 19 119
3. bludgeon. Short stick used as a weapon
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
gy • rate (j_￣´ra￣t) vi., swing with a circular or
spiral motion
in • vul • ner • a • bil • I • ty (in vəl nə rə
bi´lə te￣) n., quality of being immune to attack
im • pe • ri • ous (im pir´e￣ əs) adj., commanding;
intensely compelling
en • dow (en dau´) vt., provide with something
freely or naturally
re • lin • quish (ri liŋ´kwish) vt., give up
_ What challenge
does the youth offer
the lieutenant? What
do the youth, the
lieutenant, and the
youth’s friend do
then?
_ What do the three
men inspire the rest
of the regiment to
do? How do the
number of soldiers in
the regiment
compare to the
numbers of the
enemy?
_ How does the
youth feel about his
regiment’s flag?
What does it seem to
be to him?
_ What happens to
the color sergeant
who carries the flag?
What do the youth
and his friend do?
What does the dead

URAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
lu • di • crous (lo—_o´də krəs) adj., amusing or laughable
through obvious absurdity, incongruity, exaggeration, or
eccentricity
Chapter 20
When the two youths turned with the flag they saw that
much of the regiment had crumbled away, and the dejected
remnant was coming slowly back. The men, having hurled
themselves in projectile fashion,1 had presently expended
their forces. They slowly retreated, with their faces still
toward the spluttering woods, and their hot rifles still replying
to the din. Several officers were giving orders, their voices
keyed to screams.
“Where in hell yeh goin’?” the lieutenant was asking in a
sarcastic howl. And a red-bearded officer, whose voice of
triple brass2 could plainly be heard, was commanding:
“Shoot into ’em! Shoot into ’em, Gawd damn their souls!”
There was a melee of screeches, in which the men were
ordered to do conflicting and impossible things.
The youth and his friend had a small scuffle over the flag.
“Give it t’ me!” “No, let me keep it!” Each felt satisfied with
the other’s possession of it, but each felt bound to declare, by
an offer to carry the emblem, his willingness to further risk
himself. The youth roughly pushed his friend away.
The regiment fell back to the stolid trees. There it halted
for a moment to blaze at some dark forms that had begun to
steal upon its track. Presently it resumed its march again,
curving among the tree trunks. By the time the depleted re
When the two youths turned with the flag they saw that
much of the regiment had crumbled away, and the dejected
remnant was coming slowly back. The men, having hurled
themselves in projectile fashion,1 had presently expended
their forces. They slowly retreated, with their faces still
toward the spluttering woods, and their hot rifles still replying
to the din. Several officers were giving orders, their voices
keyed to screams.
“Where in hell yeh goin’?” the lieutenant was asking in a
sarcastic howl. And a red-bearded officer, whose voice of
triple brass2 could plainly be heard, was commanding:
“Shoot into ’em! Shoot into ’em, Gawd damn their souls!”
There was a melee of screeches, in which the men were
ordered to do conflicting and impossible things.
The youth and his friend had a small scuffle over the flag.
“Give it t’ me!” “No, let me keep it!” Each felt satisfied with
the other’s possession of it, but each felt bound to declare, by
an offer to carry the emblem, his willingness to further risk
himself. The youth roughly pushed his friend away.
The regiment fell back to the stolid trees. There it halted
for a moment to blaze at some dark forms that had begun to
steal upon its track. Presently it resumed its march again,
curving among the tree trunks. By the time the depleted regiment
had again reached the first open space they were

When the two youths turned with the flag they saw that
much of the regiment had crumbled away, and the dejected
remnant was coming slowly back. The men, having hurled
themselves in projectile fashion,1 had presently expended
their forces. They slowly retreated, with their faces still
toward the spluttering woods, and their hot rifles still replying
to the din. Several officers were giving orders, their voices
keyed to screams.
“Where in hell yeh goin’?” the lieutenant was asking in a
sarcastic howl. And a red-bearded officer, whose voice of
triple brass2 could plainly be heard, was commanding:
“Shoot into ’em! Shoot into ’em, Gawd damn their souls!”
There was a melee of screeches, in which the men were
ordered to do conflicting and impossible things.
The youth and his friend had a small scuffle over the flag.
“Give it t’ me!” “No, let me keep it!” Each felt satisfied with
the other’s possession of it, but each felt bound to declare, by
an offer to carry the emblem, his willingness to further risk
himself. The youth roughly pushed his friend away.
The regiment fell back to the stolid trees. There it halted
for a moment to blaze at some dark forms that had begun to
steal upon its track. Presently it resumed its march again,
curving among the tree trunks. By the time the depleted regiment
had again reached the first open space they were

When the two youths turned with the flag they saw that
much of the regiment had crumbled away, and the dejected
remnant was coming slowly back. The men, having hurled
themselves in projectile fashion,1 had presently expended
their forces. They slowly retreated, with their faces still
toward the spluttering woods, and their hot rifles still replying
to the din. Several officers were giving orders, their voices
keyed to screams.
“Where in hell yeh goin’?” the lieutenant was asking in a
sarcastic howl. And a red-bearded officer, whose voice of
triple brass2 could plainly be heard, was commanding:
“Shoot into ’em! Shoot into ’em, Gawd damn their souls!”
There was a melee of screeches, in which the men were
ordered to do conflicting and impossible things.
The youth and his friend had a small scuffle over the flag.
“Give it t’ me!” “No, let me keep it!” Each felt satisfied with
the other’s possession of it, but each felt bound to declare, by
an offer to carry the emblem, his willingness to further risk
himself. The youth roughly pushed his friend away.
The regiment fell back to the stolid trees. There it halted
for a moment to blaze at some dark forms that had begun to
steal upon its track. Presently it resumed its march again,
curving among the tree trunks. By the time the depleted regiment
had again reached the first open space they were
 
When the two youths turned with the flag they saw that
much of the regiment had crumbled away, and the dejected
remnant was coming slowly back. The men, having hurled
themselves in projectile fashion,1 had presently expended
their forces. They slowly retreated, with their faces still
toward the spluttering woods, and their hot rifles still replying
to the din. Several officers were giving orders, their voices
keyed to screams.
“Where in hell yeh goin’?” the lieutenant was asking in a
sarcastic howl. And a red-bearded officer, whose voice of
triple brass2 could plainly be heard, was commanding:
“Shoot into ’em! Shoot into ’em, Gawd damn their souls!”
There was a melee of screeches, in which the men were
ordered to do conflicting and impossible things.
The youth and his friend had a small scuffle over the flag.
“Give it t’ me!” “No, let me keep it!” Each felt satisfied with
the other’s possession of it, but each felt bound to declare, by
an offer to carry the emblem, his willingness to further risk
himself. The youth roughly pushed his friend away.
The regiment fell back to the stolid trees. There it halted
for a moment to blaze at some dark forms that had begun to
steal upon its track. Presently it resumed its march again,
curving among the tree trunks. By the time the depleted regiment
had again reached the first open space they were
When the two youths turned with the flag they saw that
much of the regiment had crumbled away, and the dejected
remnant was coming slowly back. The men, having hurled
themselves in projectile fashion,1 had presently expended
their forces. They slowly retreated, with their faces still
toward the spluttering woods, and their hot rifles still replying
to the din. Several officers were giving orders, their voices
keyed to screams.
“Where in hell yeh goin’?” the lieutenant was asking in a
sarcastic howl. And a red-bearded officer, whose voice of
triple brass2 could plainly be heard, was commanding:
“Shoot into ’em! Shoot into ’em, Gawd damn their souls!”
There was a melee of screeches, in which the men were
ordered to do conflicting and impossible things.
The youth and his friend had a small scuffle over the flag.
“Give it t’ me!” “No, let me keep it!” Each felt satisfied with
the other’s possession of it, but each felt bound to declare, by
an offer to carry the emblem, his willingness to further risk
himself. The youth roughly pushed his friend away.
The regiment fell back to the stolid trees. There it halted
for a moment to blaze at some dark forms that had begun to
steal upon its track. Presently it resumed its march again,
curving among the tree trunks. By the time the depleted regiment
had again reached the first open space they were
 
giment
had again reached the first open space they were
receiving a fast and merciless fire. There seemed to be mobs
all about them.
The greater part of the men, discouraged, their spirits
worn by the turmoil, acted as if stunned. They accepted the
pelting of the bullets with bowed and weary heads. It was of
no purpose to strive against walls. It was of no use to batter
themselves against granite. And from this consciousness that
they had attempted to conquer an unconquerable thing
there seemed to arise a feeling that they had been betrayed.
They glowered with bent brows, but dangerously, upon some
CHAPTER 20 121
1. in projectile fashion. Like missiles
2. triple brass. The officer’s voice is as clear and easily heard as a brass instrument,
such as a trumpet.
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
me • lee (ma￣´la￣) n., confused struggle;
hand-to-hand fight among several people
re • sume (ri zo—_om´) vt., return to or
begin again after interruption
pelt • ing (pelt´iŋ) n., succession of blows
or missiles
_ What are the
youth and his friend
forced to do?
_ Why do the youth
and his friend fight
over the flag? Why
might it be risky to
carry the flag? Who
gets the flag?
_ Describe the
situation for the
remaining men of the
youth’s regiment.
_ What attitude do
the soldiers now have
toward the enemy
fire? What do they
think of their attempt
to conquer the
enemy?
of the officers, more particularly upon the red-bearded one
with the voice of triple brass.
However, the rear of the regiment was fringed with men,
who continued to shoot irritably at the advancing foes. They
seemed resolved to make every trouble. The youthful lieutenant
was perhaps the last man in the disordered mass. His
forgotten back was toward the enemy. He had been shot in
the arm. It hung straight and rigid. Occasionally he would
cease to remember it, and be about to emphasize an oath
with a sweeping gesture. The multiplied pain caused him to
swear with incredible power.
The youth went along with slipping, uncertain feet. He
kept watchful eyes rearward. A scowl of mortification and
rage was upon his face. He had thought of a fine revenge
upon the officer who had referred to him and his fellows as
mule drivers. But he saw that it could not come to pass. His
dreams had collapsed when the mule drivers, dwindling rapidly,
had wavered and hesitated on the little clearing, and
then had recoiled. And now the retreat of the mule drivers
was a march of shame to him.
A dagger-pointed gaze from without his blackened face
was held toward the enemy, but his greater hatred was riveted
upon the man, who, not knowing him, had called him
a mule driver.
When he knew that he and his comrades had failed to do
anything in successful ways that might bring the little pangs
of a kind of remorse upon the officer, the youth allowed the
rage of the baffled to possess him. This cold officer upon a
monument, who dropped epithets unconcernedly down,
would be finer as a dead man, he thought. So grievous did he
think it that he could never possess the secret right to taunt
truly in answer.
He had pictured red letters of curious revenge. “We are
mule drivers, are we?” And now he was compelled to throw
them away.
He presently wrapped his heart in the cloak of his pride
and kept the flag erect. He harangued his fellows, pushing
against their chests with his free hand. To those he knew well
he made frantic appeals, beseeching them by name. Between
him and the lieutenant, scolding and near to losing his mind
with rage, there was felt a subtle fellowship and equality.
122 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
mor • ti • fi • ca • tion (môr tə fə
ka￣´shən) n., sense of humiliation and
shame caused by something that wounds
one’s pride or self-respect
ri • vet (ri´vət) vt., fasten firmly
griev • ous (gre￣´vəs) adj., serious; burdensome
be • seech (bi se￣ch´) vt., beg for urgently
or anxiously
_ What has
happened to the
lieutenant of the
regiment?
_ Why does the
youth feel rage and
shame? What
“revenge” do you
think the youth had
in mind, or in other
words, what do you
think the youth
hoped his regiment
would accomplish?
_ Whom does the
youth hate even
more than the
enemy?
_ How had the
youth hoped his
regiment’s actions
would make the
officer feel?
_ What does the
youth join the
lieutenant in doing?
They supported each other in all manner of hoarse, howling
protests.
But the regiment was a machine run down. The two men
babbled at a forceless thing. The soldiers who had heart to go
slowly were continually shaken in their resolves by a knowledge
that comrades were slipping with speed back to the
lines. It was difficult to think of reputation when others were
thinking of skins. Wounded men were left crying on this
black journey.
The smoke fringes and flames blustered always. The
youth, peering once through a sudden rift in a cloud, saw a
brown mass of troops, interwoven and magnified until they
appeared to be thousands. A fierce-hued flag flashed before
his vision.
Immediately, as if the uplifting of the smoke had been
prearranged, the discovered troops burst into a rasping yell,
and a hundred flames jetted toward the retreating band. A
rolling gray cloud again interposed as the regiment doggedly
replied. The youth had to depend again upon his misused
ears, which were trembling and buzzing from the melee of
musketry and yells.
The way seemed eternal. In the clouded haze men became
panic-stricken with the thought that the regiment had lost
its path, and was proceeding in a perilous direction. Once
the men who headed the wild procession turned and came
pushing back against their comrades, screaming that they
were being fired upon from points which they had considered
to be toward their own lines. At this cry a hysterical fear
and dismay beset the troops. A soldier, who heretofore had
been ambitious to make the regiment into a wise little band
that would proceed calmly amid the huge-appearing difficulties,
suddenly sank down and buried his face in his arms
with an air of bowing to a doom. From another a shrill
lamentation rang out filled with profane allusions to a general.
Men ran hither and thither, seeking with their eyes
roads of escape. With serene regularity, as if controlled by a
schedule, bullets buffed into men.3
The youth walked stolidly into the midst of the mob, and
with his flag in his hands took a stand as if he expected an
CHAPTER 20 123
3. buffed. Abbreviation of buffet, meaning “strike”
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
per • il • ous (per´ə ləs) adj., dangerous
here • to • fore (hir´tə fo￣r) adv., up to this time
_ What makes it
difficult for the
soldiers to hold their
ground and retreat
as slowly as possible?
Whom do the soldiers
have to leave
behind?
_ What difficulties
does the smoke of
battles cause for the
regiment?
attempt to push him to the ground. He unconsciously
assumed the attitude of the color bearer in the fight of the
preceding day. He passed over his brow a hand that trembled.
His breath did not come freely. He was choking during
this small wait for the crisis.
His friend came to him. “Well, Henry, I guess this is goodbye
John.”
“Oh, shut up, you damned fool!” replied the youth, and
he would not look at the other.
The officers labored like politicians to beat the mass into
a proper circle to face the menaces. The ground was uneven
and torn. The men curled into depressions and fitted themselves
snugly behind whatever would frustrate a bullet.
The youth noted with vague surprise that the lieutenant
was standing mutely with his legs far apart and his sword
held in the manner of a cane. The youth wondered what had
happened to his vocal organs that he no more cursed.
There was something curious in this little intent pause of
the lieutenant. He was like a babe which, having wept its fill,
raises its eyes and fixes upon a distant toy. He was engrossed
in this contemplation, and the soft under lip quivered from
self-whispered words.
Some lazy and ignorant smoke curled slowly. The men,
hiding from the bullets, waited anxiously for it to lift and
disclose the plight of the regiment.
The silent ranks were suddenly thrilled by the eager voice
of the youthful lieutenant bawling out: “Here they come!
Right onto us, b’Gawd!” His further words were lost in a roar
of wicked thunder from the men’s rifles.
The youth’s eyes had instantly turned in the direction
indicated by the awakened and agitated lieutenant, and he
had seen the haze of treachery disclosing a body of soldiers
of the enemy. They were so near that he could see their features.
There was a recognition as he looked at the types of
faces. Also he perceived with dim amazement that their uniforms
were rather gay in effect, being light gray, accented
with a brilliant-hued facing. Too, the clothes seemed new.
These troops had apparently been going forward with caution,
their rifles held in readiness, when the youthful lieutenant
had discovered them and their movement had been
interrupted by the volley from the blue regiment. From the
124 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
_ What isn’t the
youth willing to do
yet?
_ What warning
does the lieutenant
give? What does the
youth see when he
turns?
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
men • ace (me´nəs) n., threat, danger
treach • ery (tre´chə re￣) n., violation of allegiance or of faith
and confidence; treason
moment’s glimpse, it was derived4 that they had been
unaware of the proximity of their darksuited foes or had mistaken
the direction. Almost instantly they were shut utterly
from the youth’s sight by the smoke from the energetic rifles
of his companions. He strained his vision to learn the
accomplishment of the volley, but the smoke hung before
him.
The two bodies of troops exchanged blows in the manner
of a pair of boxers. The fast angry firings went back and
forth. The men in blue were intent with the despair of their
circumstances and they seized upon the revenge to be had at
close range. Their thunder swelled loud and valiant. Their
curving front bristled with flashes and the place resounded
with the clangor of their ramrods. The youth ducked and
dodged for a time and achieved a few unsatisfactory views of
the enemy. There appeared to be many of them and they
were replying swiftly. They seemed moving toward the blue
regiment, step by step. He seated himself gloomily on the
ground with his flag between his knees.
As he noted the vicious, wolflike temper of his comrades
he had a sweet thought that if the enemy was about to swallow
the regimental broom as a large prisoner, it could at least
have the consolation of going down with bristles forward.
But the blows of the antagonist began to grow more weak.
Fewer bullets ripped the air, and finally, when the men slackened
to learn of the fight, they could see only dark, floating
smoke. The regiment lay still and gazed. Presently some
chance whim came to the pestering5 blur, and it began to
coil heavily away. The men saw a ground vacant of fighters.
It would have been an empty stage if it were not for a few
corpses that lay thrown and twisted into fantastic shapes
upon the sward.6
At sight of this tableau, many of the men in blue sprang
from behind their covers and made an ungainly dance of joy.
Their eyes burned and a hoarse cheer of elation broke from
their dry lips.
It had begun to seem to them that events were trying to
prove that they were impotent. These little battles had evi-
CHAPTER 20 125
4. derived. Concluded
5 pestering. Bothersome
6. sward. Grassy land WWords
For
Everyday
Use
prox • im • i • ty (prək si´mə te￣) n., closeness
val • iant (val´yənt) adj., possessing or
acting with bravery or boldness
tab • leau (ta´blo￣) n., graphic description
or representation; picture
un • gain • ly (ən ga￣n´le￣) adj., clumsy,
awkward
ela • tion (e la￣´shən) n., extreme joy
_ Of what had the
enemy troops also
been unaware?
_ What begins to
happen to the
enemy? What do the
men see when they
stop shooting?
_ What has
happened to the
enemy?
dently endeavored to demonstrate that the men could not
fight well. When on the verge of submission to these opinions,
the small duel had showed them that the proportions
were not impossible, and by it they had revenged themselves
upon their misgivings and upon the foe.
The impetus of enthusiasm was theirs again. They gazed
about them with looks of uplifted pride, feeling new trust in
the grim, always confident weapons in their hands. And they
were men.
126 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
mis • giv • ing (mis gi´viŋ) n., feeling of doubt or suspicion
especially concerning a future event
im • pe • tus (im´pə təs) n., driving force
_ How does this
victory make the
regiment feel?
Respond to the Selection
How does it feel to win despite many difficulties or obstacles that stand in your
way? Describe a time in your life when you persevered to achieve a success.
Investigate, Inquire, and Imagine
CHAPTERS 16–20 127
Recall: GATHERING FACTS
1a. In Chapter 16, whom does Henry
(the youth) publicly blame for his
side’s losses in battle? To what evidence
does he point? What attitude
does Wilson (his friend) have toward
the upcoming battle? In Chapter 17,
when Henry’s regiment is fighting the
enemy, which of Henry’s actions surprise
his fellow soldiers? What does
the lieutenant say in praise of Henry’s
actions? What does the youth think
of his own actions?
2a. In Chapter 18, why do Henry
and Wilson leave their regiment?
What do they overhear the general
and an officer saying about Henry’s
regiment, the 304th? What do they
plan to have the 304th do? What
does the general think of the regiment’s
chances?
3a. What do Henry and the lieutenant
do in Chapter 19, when the
regiment begins to lose its energy in
its charge against the enemy? What
do Henry and Wilson struggle over
at the end of Chapter 19 and the
beginning of Chapter 20? In
Chapter 20, what makes it look as if
the regiment will be defeated? What
happens to change this situation for
the 304th regiment?
Interpret: FINDING MEANING
1b. What do Henry and Wilson’s different
reactions to the nerve-wracking
moments before a battle reveal
about their characters? Explain
whether you agree with Henry’s own
assessment of his actions in Chapter
17. Why might Henry feel this way
about himself, considering what he
has overcome?
2b. Why do you think this description
of their regiment surprises
Henry and Wilson? What is the
“ironical secret” Henry and Wilson
keep from their regiment? Why do
you think they keep this information
secret?
3b. What words would you use to
describe Henry’s actions in this
charge against the enemy? Why do
you think Henry and Wilson struggle
over possession of this thing? What
does carrying it symbolize or represent
to them? Why is Henry especially
upset about the idea of being
defeated by the enemy? Explain
whether the regiment’s feeling of
pride at the end of Chapter 20 is
justified.
➛
➛
➛
Understanding Literature
Description. A description gives a picture in words of a character, object, or
scene. In Chapter 17, Henry is described as “crouched behind a little tree, with
his eyes burning hatefully and his teeth set in a curlike snarl. The awkward bandage
was still upon his head, and upon it, over his wound, there was a spot of
dry blood. . . . There could be seen spasmodic gulpings at his throat.” What
does this physical description of Henry reveal about his state of mind? What
details in this description help to make his state of mind clear to you?
Suspense. Suspense is a feeling of anxiousness or curiosity. Writers create suspense
by raising questions in the reader’s mind and by using details that create
strong emotions. In what way does Crane build suspense in Chapters 16–20?
128 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
Analyze: TAKING THINGS APART
4a. In what way has Henry changed
as a soldier? Identify how he has
grown or changed since the last battle
in which he took part.
Evaluate: MAKING JUDGMENTS
5a. Crane ends Chapter 20 with the
line, “And they were men.” Decide
what you think Crane means by this
line. Why might Crane say this
about the soldiers of the 304th regiment
at this point in the story?
Synthesize: BRINGING THINGS TOGETHER
4b. Explain whether you think Henry
would behave the way he does in
these chapters if he hadn’t run in
terror from battle earlier. How would
he have fought if his fellow soldiers
hadn’t labeled him a hero?
Extend: CONNECTING IDEAS
5b. During the Civil War, as in previous
times and in other cultures,
young men came of age or proved
themselves by enlisting in war. In
what ways do young people today
come of age or prove themselves?
What do you see as the most important
milestones on the road from
childhood to adulthood?
➛
➛
Chapter 21
Presently they knew that no firing threatened them. All
ways seemed once more opened to them. The dusty blue
lines of their friends were disclosed a short distance away. In
the distance there were many colossal noises, but in all this
part of the field there was a sudden stillness.
They perceived that they were free. The depleted band
drew a long breath of relief and gathered itself into a bunch
to complete its trip.
In this last length of journey the men began to show
strange emotions. They hurried with nervous fear. Some who
had been dark and unfaltering in the grimmest moments
now could not conceal an anxiety that made them frantic. It
was perhaps that they dreaded to be killed in insignificant
ways after the times for proper military deaths had passed.
Or, perhaps, they thought it would be too ironical to get
killed at the portals1 of safety. With backward looks of perturbation,
they hastened.
As they approached their own lines there was some sarcasm
exhibited on the part of a gaunt and bronzed regiment
that lay resting in the shade of trees. Questions were wafted2
to them.
“Where th’ hell yeh been?”
“What yeh comin’ back fer?”
“Why didn’t yeh stay there?”
“Was it warm out there, sonny?”
“Goin’ home now, boys?”
One shouted in taunting mimicry: “Oh, mother, come
quick an’ look at th’ sojers!”
There was no reply from the bruised and battered regiment,
save that one man made broadcast challenges to fist
fights and the red-bearded officer walked rather near and
glared in great swashbuckler style at a tall captain in the
other regiment. But the lieutenant suppressed the man who
wished to fist fight, and the tall captain, flushing at the little
fanfare of the red-bearded one, was obliged to look intently
at some trees.
CHAPTER 21 129
1. portals. Doors, entrances
2. wafted. Tossed; asked in a light tone
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
de • plet • ed (di ple￣t´əd) adj., reduced in
number
un • fal • ter • ing (ən fôl´tə riŋ) adj.,
firm; not weakening
per • tur • ba • tion (pər tər ba￣´shən) n.,
disturbance, uneasiness
swash • buck • ler (swəsh´bə klər) n., daring
soldier or adventurer
_ What does the
regiment notice?
What are they now
able to do?
_ Why are some
men more nervous
now than they were
in battle?
_ In what way is the
regiment treated by a
“gaunt and
bronzed” regiment
when they rejoin
their forces?
The youth’s tender flesh was deeply stung by these
remarks. From under his creased brows he glowered with
hate at the mockers. He meditated upon a few revenges. Still,
many in the regiment hung their heads in criminal fashion,
so that it came to pass that the men trudged with sudden
heaviness, as if they bore upon their bended shoulders the
coffin of their honor. And the youthful lieutenant, recollecting
himself, began to mutter softly in black curses.
They turned when they arrived at their old position to
regard the ground over which they had charged.
The youth in this contemplation was smitten3 with a large
astonishment. He discovered that the distances, as compared
with the brilliant measurings of his mind, were trivial and
ridiculous. The stolid trees, where much had taken place,
seemed incredibly near. The time, too, now that he reflected,
he saw to have been short. He wondered at the number of
emotions and events that had been crowded into such little
spaces. Elfin4 thoughts must have exaggerated and enlarged
everything, he said.
It seemed, then, that there was bitter justice in the
speeches of the gaunt and bronzed veterans. He veiled a
glance of disdain at his fellows who strewed the ground,
choking with dust, red from perspiration, misty-eyed,
disheveled.
They were gulping at their canteens, fierce to wring every
mite5 of water from them, and they polished at their swollen
and watery features with coat sleeves and bunches of grass.
However, to the youth there was a considerable joy in
musing upon his performances during the charge. He had
had very little time previously in which to appreciate himself,
so that there was now much satisfaction in quietly
thinking of his actions. He recalled bits of color that in the
flurry had stamped themselves unawares upon his engaged
senses.
As the regiment lay heaving from its hot exertions the
officer who had named them as mule drivers came galloping
along the line. He had lost his cap. His tousled hair streamed
wildly, and his face was dark with vexation and wrath. His
130 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
3. smitten. Hit
4. Elfin. Otherworldly
5. mite. Tiny bit
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
trudge (trəj) vi., walk or march steadily on
veil (va￣(ə)l) vt., cover, provide, obscure, or
conceal with or as if with a veil
dis • dain (dis da￣n´) n., contempt, scorn
vex • a • tion (vek sa￣´shən) n., irritation
_ What does the
youth realize when
he looks back at the
place where they
charged and fought?
_ How does the
youth feel about the
comments of the
veteran regiment
now?
_ How does the
youth feel about his
own actions in the
charge?
_ Who rides up to
the regiment? What
does this person’s
state of mind seem to
be?
temper was displayed with more clearness by the way in
which he managed his horse. He jerked and wrenched savagely
at his bridle,6 stopping the hard-breathing animal with
a furious pull near the colonel of the regiment. He immediately
exploded in reproaches which came unbidden to the
ears of the men. They were suddenly alert, being always curious
about black words between officers.
“Oh, thunder, MacChesnay, what an awful bull you made
of this thing!” began the officer. He attempted low tones, but
his indignation caused certain of the men to learn the sense
of his words. “What an awful mess you made! Good Lord,
man, you stopped about a hundred feet this side of a very
pretty success! If your men had gone a hundred feet farther
you would have made a great charge, but as it is—what a lot
of mud diggers you’ve got anyway!”
The men, listening with bated breath, now turned their
curious eyes upon the colonel. They had a ragamuffin7 interest
in this affair.
The colonel was seen to straighten his form and put one
hand forth in oratorical fashion. He wore an injured air; it
was as if a deacon8 had been accused of stealing. The men
were wiggling in an ecstasy of excitement.
But of a sudden the colonel’s manner changed from that
of a deacon to that of a Frenchman.9 He shrugged his shoulders.
“Oh, well, general, we went as far as we could,” he said
calmly.
“‘As far as you could? Did you, b’Gawd?” snorted the
other. “Well, that wasn’t very far, was it?” he added, with a
glance of cold contempt into the other’s eyes. “Not very far,
I think. You were intended to make a diversion in favor of
Whiterside. How well you succeeded your own ears can now
tell you.” He wheeled his horse and rode stiffly away.
The colonel, bidden to hear the jarring noises of an
engagement in the woods to the left, broke out in vague
damnations.
The lieutenant, who had listened with an air of impotent
CHAPTER 21 131
6. bridle. Headgear with which a rider governs a horse
7. ragamuffin. Like ragged and dirty, but curious, street children
8. deacon. Officer in a Christian church
9. Frenchman. The author is stereotyping Frenchmen as nonchalant, or aloof
and detached.
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
bat • ed (ba￣t´əd) adj., restrained; reduced in force or intensity
di • ver • sion (də vər´zhən) n., attack that draws the attention
and force of an enemy from the point of the main operation
_ What does the
officer say about the
regiment’s charge?
_ What does the
colonel say in defense
of the regiment?
_ What does the
officer say the
regiment was
supposed to do?
What is the proof
that they failed in
this mission?
rage to the interview, spoke suddenly in firm and undaunted
tones. “I don’t care what a man is—whether he is a general
or what—if he says th’ boys didn’t put up a good fight out
there he’s a damned fool.”
“Lieutenant,” began the colonel, severely, “this is my own
affair, and I’ll trouble you—”
The lieutenant made an obedient gesture. “All right,
colonel, all right,” he said. He sat down with an air of being
content with himself.
The news that the regiment had been reproached went
along the line. For a time the men were bewildered by it.
“Good thunder!” they ejaculated, staring at the vanishing
form of the general. They conceived it to be a huge mistake.
Presently, however, they began to believe that in truth
their efforts had been called light. The youth could see this
conviction weigh upon the entire regiment until the men
were like cuffed10 and cursed animals, but withal rebellious.
The friend, with a grievance in his eye, went to the youth.
“I wonder what he does want,” he said. “He must think we
went out there an’ played marbles! I never see sech a man!”
The youth developed a tranquil philosophy for these
moments of irritation. “Oh, well,” he rejoined, “he probably
didn’t see nothing of it at all and got mad as blazes,11 and
concluded we were a lot of sheep, just because we didn’t do
what he wanted done. It’s a pity old Grandpa Henderson got
killed yestirday—he’d have known that we did our best and
fought good. It’s just our awful luck, that’s what.”
“I should say so,” replied the friend. He seemed to be
deeply wounded at an injustice. “I should say we did have
awful luck! There’s no fun in fightin’ fer people when everything
yeh do—no matter what—ain’t done right. I have a
notion t’ stay behind next time an’ let ’em take their ol’
charge an’ go t’ th’ devil with it.”
The youth spoke soothingly to his comrade. “Well, we
both did good. I’d like to see the fool what’d say we both didn’t
do as good as we could!”
“Of course we did,” declared the friend stoutly. “An’ I’d
break th’ feller’s neck if he was as big as a church. But we’re
132 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
un • daunt • ed (ən dôn´təd) adj., courageous
in the face of danger or difficulty
light (l_￣t) adj., of little importance
with • al (wi thôl´) adv., together with
this; besides
tran • quil (traŋ´kwəl) adj., free from agitation
of mind or spirit
10. cuffed. Beaten
11. as blazes. Slang for “very”
_ What does the
lieutenant say in
defense of the
regiment?
_ How do the men
of the regiment feel
when they realize
they have been
reproached, not
praised for their
actions?
_ What does the
youth’s friend find
unjust? What does
he say he feels like
doing “next time”?
_ What has the
friend overheard
other soldiers saying?
all right, anyhow, for I heard one feller say that we two fit th’
best in th’ reg’ment, an’ they had a great argument ’bout it.
Another feller, ’a course, he had t’ up an’ say it was a lie—he
seen all what was goin’ on an’ he never seen us from th’
beginnin’ t’ th’ end. An’ a lot more struck in an’ ses it wasn’t
a lie—we did fight like thunder, an’ they give us quite a sendoff.
12 But this is what I can’t stand—these everlastin’ ol’ soldiers,
titterin’ an’ laughin’, an’ then that general, he’s crazy.”
The youth exclaimed with sudden exasperation: “He’s a
lunkhead! He makes me mad. I wish he’d come along next
time. We’d show ’im what—”
He ceased because several men had come hurrying up.
Their faces expressed a bringing of great news.
“O Flem, yeh jest oughta heard!” cried one, eagerly.
“Heard what?” said the youth.
“Yeh jest oughta heard!” repeated the other, and he
arranged himself to tell his tidings. The others made an
excited circle. “Well, sir, th’ colonel met your lieutenant
right by us—it was damnedest thing I ever heard—an’ he ses:
‘Ahem! ahem!’ he ses. ‘Mr. Hasbrouck!’ he ses, ‘by th’ way,
who was that lad what carried th’ flag?’ he ses. There,
Flemin’, what d’ yeh think ’a that? ‘Who was th’ lad what
carried th’ flag?’ he ses, an’ th’ lieutenant, he speaks up right
away: ’That’s Flemin’, an’ he’s a jimhickey,’ he ses, right
away. What? I say he did. ‘A jimhickey,’13 he ses—those ’r his
words. He did, too. I say he did. If you kin tell this story better
than I kin, go ahead an’ tell it. Well, then, keep yer mouth
shet. Th’ lieutenant, he ses: ’He’s a jimhickey,’ an’ th’
colonel, he ses: ‘Ahem! ahem! he is, indeed, a very good man
t’ have, ahem! He kep’ th’ flag ’way t’ th’ front. I saw ’im.
He’s a good un,’ ses th’ colonel. ‘You bet,’ ses th’ lieutenant,
‘he an’ a feller named Wilson was at th’ head ’a th’ charge,
an’ howlin’ like Indians all th’ time,’ he ses. ‘Head a’ th’
charge all th’ time,’ he ses. ‘A feller named Wilson,’ he ses.
There, Wilson, m’boy, put that in a letter an’ send it hum t’
yer mother, hay? ‘A feller named Wilson,’ he ses. An’ th’
colonel, he ses: ‘Were they, indeed? Ahem! ahem! My sakes!’
he ses. ‘At th’ head ’a th’ reg’ment?’ he ses. ‘They were,’ ses
CHAPTER 21 133
12. send-off. Showing of goodwill on the start of a journey
13. jimhickey. Similar to jim-dandy, meaning “an excellent fellow”
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
tid • ing (t_￣´diŋ) n., piece of news
_ What has this
soldier overheard the
colonel and the
lieutenant saying?
th’ lieutenant. ‘My sakes!’ ses th’ colonel. He ses: ‘Well, well,
well,’ he ses, ‘those two babies?’ ‘They were,’ ses th’ lieutenant.
‘Well, well,’ ses th’ colonel, ‘they deserve t’ be majorgenerals,’
14 he ses. ‘They deserve t’ be major-generals.’”
The youth and his friend had said: “Huh!” “Yer lyin’,
Thompson.” “Oh, go t’ blazes!” “He never sed it.” “Oh, what
a lie!” “Huh!” But despite these youthful scoffings and
embarrassments, they knew that their faces were deeply
flushing from thrills of pleasure. They exchanged a secret
glance of joy and congratulation.
They speedily forgot many things. The past held no pictures
of error and disappointment. They were very happy,
and their hearts swelled with grateful affection for the
colonel and the youthful lieutenant.
134 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
14. major generals. Generals with a fairly high rank; commanders
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
flush (fləsh) vi., blush
_ What does the
colonel say in praise
of the youth and his
friend?
_ How does this
compliment make
the youth and his
friend feel? What
does this compliment
make them forget?
Chapter 22
When the woods again began to pour forth the dark-hued
masses of the enemy the youth felt serene self-confidence.
He smiled briefly when he saw men dodge and duck at the
long screechings of shells that were thrown in giant handfuls
over them. He stood, erect and tranquil, watching the attack
begin against a part of the line that made a blue curve along
the side of an adjacent hill. His vision being unmolested by
smoke from the rifles of his companions, he had opportunities
to see parts of the hard fight. It was a relief to perceive at
last from whence1 came some of these noises which had
been roared into his ears.
Off a short way he saw two regiments fighting a little separate
battle with two other regiments. It was in a cleared
space, wearing a set-apart look. They were blazing as if upon
a wager, giving and taking tremendous blows. The firings
were incredibly fierce and rapid. These intent regiments
apparently were oblivious of all larger purposes of war, and
were slugging each other as if at a matched game.
In another direction he saw a magnificent brigade going
with the evident intention of driving the enemy from a
wood. They passed in out of sight and presently there was a
most awe-inspiring racket in the wood. The noise was
unspeakable. Having stirred this prodigious uproar, and,
apparently, finding it too prodigious, the brigade, after a little
time, came marching airily out again with its fine formation
in nowise disturbed. There were no traces of speed in its
movements. The brigade was jaunty and seemed to point a
proud thumb2 at the yelling wood.
On a slope to the left there was a long row of guns, gruff
and maddened, denouncing the enemy, who, down through
the woods, were forming for another attack in the pitiless
monotony of conflicts. The round red discharges from the
guns made a crimson flare and a high, thick smoke.
Occasional glimpses could be caught of groups of the toiling
artillerymen. In the rear of this row of guns stood a house,
CHAPTER 22 135
1. whence. What place, source, or cause
2. proud thumb. Gesture of scorn or defiance
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
o • bliv • i • ous (ə bli´ve￣ əs) adj., lacking
active conscious knowledge or awareness
pro • di • gious (prə di´jəs) adj., exciting
amazement or wonder
air • i • ly (ar´ə le￣) adv., in a light and
graceful manner; proudly
jaun • ty (jôn´te￣) adj., lively in manner or
appearance
_ How does the
youth feel when the
enemy again begins
to attack?
_ What does the
youth see one proud
regiment do? Are
they successful in
their goal?
calm and white, amid bursting shells. A congregation of
horses, tied to a long railing, were tugging frenziedly at their
bridles. Men were running hither and thither.3
The detached battle between the four regiments lasted for
some time. There chanced to be no interference, and they
settled their dispute by themselves. They struck savagely and
powerfully at each other for a period of minutes, and then
the lighter-hued regiments faltered and drew back, leaving
the dark-blue lines shouting.4 The youth could see the two
flags shaking with laughter amid the smoke remnants.
Presently there was a stillness, pregnant with meaning.
The blue lines shifted and changed a trifle and stared expectantly
at the silent woods and fields before them. The hush
was solemn and churchlike, save for a distant battery5 that,
evidently unable to remain quiet, sent a faint rolling thunder
over the ground. It irritated, like the noises of unimpressed
boys. The men imagined that it would prevent their
perched6 ears from hearing the first words of the new battle.
Of a sudden the guns on the slope roared out a message of
warning. A spluttering sound had begun in the woods. It
swelled with amazing speed to a profound clamor that
involved the earth in noises. The splitting crashes swept
along the lines until an interminable roar was developed. To
those in the midst of it became a din fitted to the universe.
It was the whirring and thumping of gigantic machinery,
complications among the smaller stars. The youth’s ears were
filled cups. They were incapable of hearing more.
On an incline over which a road wound he saw wild and
desperate rushes of men perpetually backward and forward
in riotous surges. These parts of the opposing armies were
two long waves that pitched upon each other madly at dictated
points. To and fro they swelled. Sometimes, one side by
its yells and cheers would proclaim decisive blows, but a
moment later the other side would be all yells and cheers.
Once the youth saw a spray of light forms go in houndlike
136 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
3. hither and thither. To this place and to that place
4. lighter-hued . . . shouting. The Union troops, of which the youth Henry is
a member, push back the Confederate troops.
5. battery. Artillery unit of an army, or the persons who operate the heavy
guns
6. perched. Raised; eager to hear
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
fren • zied • ly (fren´ze￣d le￣) adv., in a furious
and wild manner
preg • nant (preg´nənt) adj., full, teeming
pro • found (prə faund´) adj., coming
from, reaching to, or situated at a depth
ri • ot • ous (r_￣´ə təs) adj., violent, disorderly
surge (sərj) n., swelling, rolling, or sweeping
forward like that of a wave
_ Who wins the
battle between the
four regiments?
_ To what are the
rushes of the soldiers
compared?
leaps toward the waving blue lines. There was much howling,
and presently it went away with a vast mouthful of prisoners.
Again, he saw a blue wave dash with such thunderous
force against a gray obstruction that it seemed to clear the
earth of it and leave nothing but trampled sod. And always
in their swift and deadly rushes to and fro the men screamed
and yelled like maniacs.
Particular pieces of fence or secure positions behind collections
of trees were wrangled over, as gold thrones or pearl
bedsteads. There were desperate lunges at these chosen spots
seemingly every instant, and most of them were bandied like
light toys between the contending forces. The youth could
not tell from the battle flags flying like crimson foam in
many directions which color of cloth was winning.
His emaciated regiment bustled forth with undiminished
fierceness when its time came. When assaulted again by bullets,
the men burst out in a barbaric cry of rage and pain.
They bent their heads in aims of intent hatred behind the
projected hammers of their guns. Their ramrods clanged
loud with fury as their eager arms pounded the cartridges
into the rifle barrels. The front of the regiment was a smokewall
penetrated by the flashing points of yellow and red.
Wallowing in the fight, they were in an astonishingly
short time resmudged.7 They surpassed in stain and dirt all
their previous appearances. Moving to and fro with strained
exertion, jabbering the while, they were, with their swaying
bodies, black faces, and glowing eyes, like strange and ugly
fiends jigging8 heavily in the smoke.
The lieutenant, returning from a tour after a bandage,9
produced from a hidden receptacle of his mind new and portentous
oaths suited to the emergency. Strings of expletives
he swung lashlike over the backs of his men, and it was evident
that his previous efforts had in nowise10 impaired his
resources.
The youth, still the bearer of the colors, did not feel his
idleness. He was deeply absorbed as a spectator. The crash
and swing of the great drama made him lean forward,
CHAPTER 22 137
7. resmudged. Covered again with the grime of smoke, dirt, and sweat
8. jigging. Moving with rapid and jerky motions
9. tour after a bandage. Journey in search of a bandage (for his injured hand)
10. nowise. No way
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
ban • dy (ban´de￣) vt., toss from side to side
carelessly
ex • er • tion (eg zər´shən) n., fatiguing
effort
por • ten • tous (pôr ten´təs) adj., grave or
serious
ex • ple • tive (ek´splə tiv) n., exclamatory
word or phrase, especially a swear or a curse
_ What do men find
positions behind
fences or trees as
valuable as?
_ How does the
youth’s regiment act
when needed to fight
again?
intent-eyed, his face working in small contortions. Sometimes
he prattled,11 words coming unconsciously from him in
grotesque exclamations. He did not know that he breathed;
that the flag hung silently over him, so absorbed was he.
A formidable line of the enemy came within dangerous
range. They could be seen plainly—tall, gaunt men with
excited faces running with long strides toward a wandering
fence.
At sight of this danger the men suddenly ceased their cursing
monotone. There was an instant of strained silence
before they threw up their rifles and fired a plumping volley
at the foes. There had been no order given; the men, upon
recognizing the menace, had immediately let drive their
flock12 of bullets without waiting for word of command.
But the enemy were quick to gain the protection of the
wandering line of fence. They slid down behind it with
remarkable celerity, and from this position they began
briskly to slice up the blue men.
These latter braced their energies for a great struggle.
Often, white clinched13 teeth shone from the dusky faces.
Many heads surged to and fro, floating upon a pale sea of
smoke. Those behind the fence frequently shouted and
yelped in taunts and gibelike14 cries, but the regiment maintained
a stressed silence. Perhaps, at this new assault the men
recalled the fact that they had been named mud diggers, and
it made their situation thrice15 bitter. They were breathlessly
intent upon keeping the ground and thrusting away the
rejoicing body of the enemy. They fought swiftly and with a
despairing savageness denoted in their expressions.
The youth had resolved not to budge whatever should
happen. Some arrows of scorn that had buried themselves in
his heart had generated strange and unspeakable hatred. It
was clear to him that his final and absolute revenge was to
be achieved by his dead body lying, torn and gluttering,16
upon the field. This was to be a poignant retaliation upon
138 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
11. prattled. Made meaningless sounds suggestive of children’s chatter
12. flock. Large number
13. clinched. Clenched, or closed tightly
14. gibelike. Taunting, mocking
15. thrice. Three times as
16. gluttering. Guttering, or dripping fluid as a candle does wax
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
for • mi • da • ble (fôr´mə də bəl) adj.,
causing fear, dread, or apprehension
men • ace (me´nəs) n., threat, danger
ce • ler • i • ty (sə ler´ə te￣) n., quickness of
motion or action
de • note (di no￣t´) vt., make known
poi • gnant (pôi´nyənt) adj., designed to
make an impression
_ What do the men
of the regiment no
longer need before
they attack?
_ On what are the
men of the regiment
intent? What makes
their situation “thrice
bitter”?
_ What does the
youth see as his
revenge upon the
officer who insulted
his regiment?
the officer who had said “mule drivers,” and later “mud diggers,”
for in all the wild graspings of his mind for a unit
responsible for his sufferings and commotions he always
seized upon the man who had dubbed him wrongly. And it
was his idea, vaguely formulated, that his corpse would be
for those eyes a great and salt17reproach.
The regiment bled extravagantly. Grunting bundles of
blue began to drop. The orderly sergeant18 of the youth’s
company was shot through the cheeks. Its supports being
injured, his jaw hung afar down, disclosing in the wide cavern
of his mouth a pulsing mass of blood and teeth. And
with it all he made attempts to cry out. In his endeavor there
was a dreadful earnestness, as if he conceived that one great
shriek would make him well.
The youth saw him presently go rearward. His strength
seemed in nowise impaired. He ran swiftly, casting wild
glances for succor.
Others fell down about the feet of their companions.
Some of the wounded crawled out and away, but many lay
still, their bodies twisted into impossible shapes.
The youth looked once for his friend. He saw a vehement
young man, powder-smeared and frowzled,19 whom he knew
to be him. The lieutenant, also, was unscathed in his position
at the rear. He had continued to curse, but it was now
with the air of a man who was using his last box of oaths.
For the fire of the regiment had begun to wane and drip.
The robust voice, that had come strangely from the thin
ranks, was growing rapidly weak.
CHAPTER 22 139
17. salt. Bitter
18. orderly sergeant. Sergeant in charge of carrying messages for superior
officers
19. frowzled. Having a sloppy, uncared for appearance
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
en • deav • or (en de´vər) n., serious
determined effort
suc • cor (sə´kər) n., relief, help, aid
un • scathed (ən ska￣thd´) adj., wholly
unharmed; not injured
wane (wa￣n) vi., decrease in size, extent,
or degree
ro • bust (ro￣ bəst´) adj., having or showing
power, strength, or firmness; healthy
_ What effect does
the youth believe his
corpse would have
on the officer?
_ What is
happening to the
youth’s regiment?
_ What happens to
the orderly sergeant?
Chapter 23
The colonel came running along back of the line. There
were other officers following him. “We must charge ’m!”
they shouted. “We must charge ’m!” they cried with resentful
voices, as if anticipating a rebellion against this plan by
the men.
The youth, upon hearing the shouts, began to study the
distance between him and the enemy. He made vague calculations.
He saw that to be firm soldiers they must go forward.
It would be death to stay in the present place, and with all
the circumstances to go backward would exalt too many others.
Their hope was to push the galling foes away from the
fence.
He expected that his companions, weary and stiffened,
would have to be driven to this assault, but as he turned
toward them he perceived with a certain surprise that they
were giving quick and unqualified expressions of assent.
There was an ominous, clanging overture to the charge when
the shafts of the bayonets rattled upon the rifle barrels.1 At
the yelled words of command the soldiers sprang forward in
eager leaps. There was new and unexpected force in the
movement of the regiment. A knowledge of its faded and
jaded condition made the charge appear like a paroxysm, a
display of the strength that comes before a final feebleness.
The men scampered in insane fever of haste, racing as if to
achieve a sudden success before an exhilarating fluid should
leave them. It was a blind and despairing rush by the collection
of men in dusty and tattered blue, over a green sward2
and under a sapphire sky, toward a fence, dimly outlined in
smoke, from behind which spluttered the fierce rifles of enemies.
The youth kept the bright colors to the front. He was waving
his free arm in furious circles, the while shrieking mad
calls and appeals, urging on those that did not need to be
urged, for it seemed that the mob of blue men hurling them-
140 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
1. shafts . . . barrels. Blades like knives rattle against the parts of the guns that
discharge, to which they are attached.
2. sward. Grass-covered land
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
ex • alt (eg zôlt´) vt., raise in rank, power,
or character
gall • ing (gô´liŋ) adj., especially irritating
o • ver • ture (o￣ və(r)´chur) n., orchestral
introduction to a musical dramatic work
par • ox • ysm (par´ək si zəm) n., fit,
attack, or sudden increase or recurrence of
symptoms
_ What is the
regiment ordered to
do? According to the
youth, why is this a
good decision?
_ What is the youth
surprised to see in his
regiment? To what is
their eagerness to
move forward
compared?
_ What does the
youth do during the
charge?
selves on the dangerous group of rifles were again grown
suddenly wild with an enthusiasm of unselfishness. From
the many firings started toward them, it looked as if they
would merely succeed in making a great sprinkling of corpses
on the grass between their former position and the fence.
But they were in a state of frenzy, perhaps because of forgotten
vanities, and it made an exhibition of sublime recklessness.
There was no obvious questioning, nor figurings, nor
diagrams.3 There was, apparently, no considered loopholes.
It appeared that the swift wings of their desires would have
shattered against the iron gates of the impossible.
He himself felt the daring spirit of a savage, religion-mad.
He was capable of profound sacrifices, a tremendous death.
He had not time for dissections, but he knew that he
thought of the bullets only as things that could prevent him
from reaching the place of his endeavor. There were subtle
flashings of joy within him that thus should be his mind.
He strained all his strength. His eyesight was shaken and
dazzled by the tension of thought and muscle. He did not see
anything excepting the mist of smoke gashed by the little
knives of fire, but he knew that in it lay the aged fence of a
vanished farmer protecting the snuggled bodies of the gray
men.
As he ran a thought of the shock of contact gleamed in his
mind. He expected a great concussion when the two bodies
of troops crashed together. This became a part of his wild
battle madness. He could feel the onward swing of the regiment
about him and he conceived of a thunderous, crushing
blow that would prostrate the resistance and spread consternation
and amazement for miles. The flying regiment was
going to have a catapultian4 effect. This dream made him
run faster among his comrades, who were giving vent5 to
hoarse and frantic cheers.
But presently he could see that many of the men in gray
did not intend to abide the blow. The smoke, rolling, disclosed
men who ran, their faces still turned. These grew to a
CHAPTER 23 141
3. There . . . diagrams. The soldiers did not question or analyze what they
were doing.
4. catapultian. Like a catapult, or device that hurls missiles
5. giving vent. Letting forth
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
van • i • ty (va nə´te￣) n., something that is
vain, empty, or valueless
dis • sec • tion (di sek´shən) n., act or
process of analyzing and interpreting
something in detail
con • ster • na • tion (kən(t) stər na´shən)
n., amazement or dismay that hinders or
throws into confusion
abide (ə b_￣d´) vt., bear patiently; accept
without objection
_ What does it
appear will happen
to the regiment?
_ What have the
men forgotten? In
what way don’t they
look at their
situation?
_ What is the
youth’s state of
mind? What is he
capable of doing?
_ What does the
youth imagine will
happen when his
regiment meets the
enemy forces?
_ What do the
enemy troops do to
contradict what the
youth had imagined?
crowd, who retired stubbornly. Individuals wheeled frequently
to send a bullet at the blue wave.
But at one part of the line there was a grim and obdurate
group that made no movement. They were settled firmly
down behind posts and rails. A flag, ruffled and fierce, waved
over them and their rifles dinned fiercely.
The blue whirl of men got very near, until it seemed that
in truth there would be a close and frightful scuffle. There
was an expressed disdain in the opposition of the little
group, that changed the meaning of the cheers of the men
in blue. They became yells of wrath, directed, personal. The
cries of the two parties were now in sound an interchange of
scathing insults.
They in blue showed their teeth; their eyes shone all
white. They launched themselves as at the throats of those
who stood resisting. The space between dwindled to an
insignificant distance.
The youth had centered the gaze of his soul upon that
other flag. Its possession would be high pride. It would
express bloody minglings, near blows. He had a gigantic
hatred for those who made great difficulties and complications.
They caused it to be as a craved treasure of mythology,
hung amid tasks and contrivances of danger.
He plunged like a mad horse at it. He was resolved it
should not escape if wild blows and darings of blows could
seize it. His own emblem, quivering and aflare, was winging
toward the other. It seemed there would shortly be an
encounter of strange beaks and claws, as of eagles.6
The swirling body of blue men came to a sudden halt at
close and disastrous range and roared a swift volley. The
group in gray was split and broken by this fire, but its riddled
body still fought. The men in blue yelled again and rushed
in upon it.
The youth, in his leapings, saw, as through a mist, a picture
of four or five men stretched upon the ground or
writhing upon their knees with bowed heads as if they had
been stricken by bolts from the sky. Tottering among them
was the rival color bearer, whom the youth saw had been bitten
vitally by the bullets of the last formidable volley. He per-
142 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
6. strange beaks . . . eagles. Refers to the animals depicted on the flags
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
ob • du • rate (əb´də rət) adj., stubbornly
persistent in wrongdoing
con • triv • ance (kən tr_￣´vən(t)s) n., artificial
arrangement or development
rid • dled (rid´ləd) adj., pierced with
many holes
vi • tal • ly (v_￣´t_l e￣) adv., in a manner
that is destructive to life; mortally; fatally
_ What does the
youth wish to do?
_ What does the
youth do to achieve
his goal?
_ What has
happened to the
color bearer who
carries the enemy’s
flag?
ceived this man fighting a last struggle, the struggle of one
whose legs are grasped by demons. It was a ghastly battle.
Over his face was the bleach of death, but set upon it was the
dark and hard lines of desperate purpose. With this terrible
grin of resolution he hugged his precious flag to him and was
stumbling and staggering in his design to go the way that led
to safety for it.
But his wounds always made it seem that his feet were
retarded, held, and he fought a grim fight, as with invisible
ghouls7 fastened greedily upon his limbs. Those in advance
of the scampering blue men, howling cheers, leaped at the
fence. The despair of the lost was in his eyes as he glanced
back at them.
The youth’s friend went over the obstruction in a tumbling
heap and sprang at the flag as a panther at prey. He
pulled at it and, wrenching it free, swung up its red brilliancy
with a mad cry of exultation even as the color bearer, gasping,
lurched over in a final throe and, stiffening convulsively,
turned his dead face to the ground. There was much blood
upon the grass blades.
At the place of success there began more wild clamorings
of cheers. The men gesticulated and bellowed in an ecstasy.
When they spoke it was as if they considered their listener to
be a mile away. What hats and caps were left to them they
often slung8 high in the air.
At one part of the line four men had been swooped upon,
and they now sat as prisoners. Some blue men were about
them in an eager and curious circle. The soldiers had trapped
strange birds, and there was an examination. A flurry of fast
questions was in the air.
One of the prisoners was nursing a superficial wound in
the foot. He cuddled it, baby-wise,9 but he looked up from it
often to curse with an astonishing utter abandon straight at
the noses of his captors. He consigned them to red regions;10
he called upon the pestilential wrath of strange gods. And
with it all he was singularly free from recognition of the finer
points of the conduct of prisoners of war. It was as if a
CHAPTER 23 143
7. ghouls. Legendary evil being that robs graves and feeds on the dead
8. slung. Thrown
9. cuddled it baby-wise. Held it as one cradles a baby
10. red regions. Hell
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
throe (thro￣) n., pang, spasm
ut • ter (ə´tər) adj., carried to the utmost
point or highest degree; total
con • sign (kən s_￣n´) vt., give, transfer, or
deliver into the hands or control of another;
commit to a final destination or fate
pes • ti • len • tial (pes tə len(t)´shəl) adj.,
deadly
_ What does the
youth’s friend do?
_ What is the result
of the battle?
_ How many men
have been captured?
clumsy clod had trod upon his toe and he conceived it to be
his privilege, his duty, to use deep, resentful oaths.
Another, who was a boy in years, took his plight with
great calmness and apparent good nature. He conversed with
the men in blue, studying their faces with his bright and
keen eyes. They spoke of battles and conditions. There was
an acute interest in all their faces during this exchange of
view points. It seemed a great satisfaction to hear voices from
where all had been darkness and speculation.
The third captive sat with a morose countenance. He preserved
a stoical and cold attitude. To all advances he made
one reply without variation, “Ah, go t’ hell!”
The last of the four was always silent and, for the most
part, kept his face turned in unmolested directions. From the
views the youth received he seemed to be in a state of
absolute dejection. Shame was upon him, and with it profound
regret that he was, perhaps, no more to be counted in
the ranks of his fellows. The youth could detect no expression
that would allow him to believe that the other was giving
a thought to his narrowed future, the pictured dungeons,
perhaps, and starvations and brutalities, liable to the imagination.
All to be seen was shame for captivity and regret for
the right to antagonize.
After the men had celebrated sufficiently they settled
down behind the old rail fence, on the opposite side to the
one from which their foes had been driven. A few shot perfunctorily
at distant marks.
There was some long grass. The youth nestled in it and
rested, making a convenient rail support the flag. His friend,
jubilant and glorified, holding his treasure with vanity, came
to him there. They sat side by side and congratulated each
other.
144 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE WWords
For
Everyday
Use
mo • rose (mə ro￣s´) adj., marked by or
expressive of gloom
coun • te • nance (kaun´t_n ən(t)s) n., look,
expression
de • jec • tion (di jek´shən) n., lowness of
spirits
li • a • ble (l_￣´bəl) adj., exposed or subject to
some usually adverse possibility or action
an • tag • o • nize (an ta´gə n_￣z) vt., act in
opposition to; provoke the hostility of
per • func • to • ri • ly (pər fəŋ(k)´tə rə le￣)
adv., without interest or enthusiasm
_ What is one boy’s
manner toward his
captors? What does
the regiment find
satisfying?
_ What does the
youth think the
fourth prisoner is
feeling?
Chapter 24
The roarings that had stretched in a long line of sound
across the face of the forest began to grow intermittent and
weaker. The stentorian speeches of the artillery continued in
some distant encounter, but the crashes of the musketry had
almost ceased. The youth and his friend of a sudden looked
up, feeling a deadened form of distress at the waning of these
noises, which had become a part of life. They could see
changes going on among the troops. There were marchings
this way and that way. A battery wheeled leisurely. On the
crest of a small hill was the thick gleam of many departing
muskets.
The youth arose. “Well, what now, I wonder?” he said. By
his tone he seemed to be preparing to resent some new monstrosity
in the way of dins and smashes.1 He shaded his eyes
with his grimy hand and gazed over the field.
His friend also arose and stared. “I bet we’re goin’ t’ git
along out of this an’ back over th’ river,” said he.
“Well, I swan!”2 said the youth.
They waited, watching. Within a little while the regiment
received orders to retrace its way. The men got up grunting
from the grass, regretting the soft repose. They jerked their
stiffened legs, and stretched their arms over their heads. One
man swore as he rubbed his eyes. They all groaned “O Lord!”
They had as many objections to this change as they would
have had to a proposal for a new battle.
They tramped slowly back over the field across which they
had run in a mad scamper.
The regiment marched until it had joined its fellows. The
reformed brigade, in column, aimed through a wood at the
road. Directly they were in a mass of dust-covered troops,
and were trudging along in a way parallel to the enemy’s
lines as these had been defined by the previous turmoil.
They passed within view of a stolid white house, and saw
in front of it groups of their comrades lying in wait behind a
neat breastwork.3 A row of guns were booming at a distant
CHAPTER 24 145
1. dins and smashes. Loud sounds and violent attacks or blows
2. swan. Declare, swear
3. breastwork. Temporary fortification, or trench-like defense WWords
For
Everyday
Use
in • ter • mit • tent (in tər mi´t_nt) adj.,
coming and going at intervals; not continuous
sten • to • ri • an (sten to￣r´e￣ ən) adj.,
extremely loud
dead • ened (de´d_nd) adj., impaired in
vigor or sensation
_ How does the
regiment feel when
the musket fire ends?
Why do the men feel
this way?
_ What new orders
do the men receive?
How do they feel
about this order?
enemy. Shells thrown in reply were raising clouds of dust
and splinters. Horsemen dashed along the line of intrenchments.
At this point of its march the division curved away from
the field and went winding off in the direction of the river.
When the significance of this movement had impressed
itself upon the youth he turned his head and looked over his
shoulder toward the trampled and debris-strewed ground. He
breathed a breath of new satisfaction. He finally nudged his
friend. “Well, it’s all over,” he said to him.
His friend gazed backward. “B’Gawd, it is,” he assented.
They mused.
For a time the youth was obliged to reflect in a puzzled
and uncertain way. His mind was undergoing a subtle
change. It took moments for it to cast off its battleful ways
and resume its accustomed course of thought. Gradually his
brain emerged from the clogged clouds, and at last he was
enabled to more closely comprehend himself and circumstance.
He understood then that the existence of shot and
counter-shot was in the past. He had dwelt in a land of
strange, squalling upheavals and had come forth. He had
been where there was red of blood and black of passion, and
he was escaped. His first thoughts were given to rejoicings at
this fact.
Later he began to study his deeds, his failures, and his
achievements. Thus, fresh from scenes where many of his
usual machines of reflection had been idle, from where he
had proceeded sheeplike, he struggled to marshal all his acts.
At last they marched before him clearly. From this present
view point he was enabled to look upon them in spectator
fashion and to criticize them with some correctness, for his
new condition had already defeated certain sympathies.
Regarding his procession of memory he felt gleeful and
unregretting, for in it his public deeds were paraded in great
and shining prominence. Those performances which had
been witnessed by his fellows marched now in wide purple
and gold,4 having various deflections. They went gayly with
146 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
4. purple and gold. Purple is a color traditionally associated with royalty, and
the color gold is associated with wealth.
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
muse (myo—_oz) vi., become absorbed in
thought; turn something over in the mind
meditatively
mar • shal (mär´shəl) vt., place in proper
rank or position
prom • i • nence (prə´mə nən(t)s) n.,
greatness, distinction, importance
de • flec • tion (di flek´shən) n., turning
aside or off course
_ Where does the
regiment head?
What does heading
in this direction mean
for the regiment?
_ What
transformation does
the youth’s mind
undergo?
_ About what does
the youth begin to
think?
_ How does the
youth feel about his
memories of his
public actions?
music. It was pleasure to watch these things. He spent
delightful minutes viewing the gilded images of memory.
He saw that he was good. He recalled with a thrill of joy
the respectful comments of his fellows upon his conduct.
Nevertheless, the ghost of his flight from the first engagement
appeared to him and danced. There were small shoutings
in his brain about these matters. For a moment he
blushed, and the light of his soul flickered with shame.
A specter of reproach came to him. There loomed the dogging
memory of the tattered soldier—he who, gored by bullets
and faint for blood, had fretted concerning an imagined
wound in another; he who had loaned his last of strength
and intellect for the tall soldier; he who, blind with weariness
and pain, had been deserted in the field.
For an instant a wretched chill of sweat was upon him at
the thought that he might be detected in the thing. As he
stood persistently before his vision, he gave vent to a cry of
sharp irritation and agony.
His friend turned. “What’s the matter, Henry?” he
demanded. The youth’s reply was an outburst of crimson
oaths.
As he marched along the little branch-hung roadway
among his prattling companions this vision of cruelty
brooded over him. It clung near him always and darkened
his view of these deeds in purple and gold. Whichever way
his thoughts turned they were followed by the somber phantom
of the desertion in the fields. He looked stealthily at his
companions, feeling sure that they must discern in his face
evidences of this pursuit. But they were plodding in ragged
array, discussing with quick tongues the accomplishments of
the late battle.
“Oh, if a man should come up an’ ask me, I’d say we got
a dum good lickin’.”
“Lickin’—in yer eye! We ain’t licked, sonny. We’re goin’
down here aways, swing aroun’, an’ come in behint ’em.”
“Oh, hush, with your comin’ in behint ’em. I’ve seen all
’a that I wanta. Don’t tell me about comin’ in behint—”
“Bill Smithers, he ses he’d rather been in ten hundred battles
than been in that heluva hospital. He ses they got
CHAPTER 24 147 WWords
For
Everyday
Use
gild • ed (gil´dəd) adj., overlaid with or as
if with gold; given an attractive but sometimes
deceptive appearance
spec • ter (spek´tər) n., ghost; something
that haunts the mind
dog • ging (dôg´iŋ) adj., worrying, pursuing
as a dog does prey
dis • cern (di sərn´) vt., detect with the eyes
ar • ray (ə ra￣´) n., grouping or arrangement
_ What shameful
thing does the youth
remember?
_ What “specter of
reproach” appears in
the youth’s mind?
What good qualities
does the youth see in
this person? What
does he realize about
his actions toward
this person?
_ What effect does
the youth’s memory
of his cruelty to the
tattered soldier have
on his memories of
the good deeds he
performed?
shootin’ in th’ night-time, an’ shells dropped plum5 among
’em in th’ hospital. He ses sech hollerin’ he never see.”
“Hasbrouck? He’s th’ best off’cer in this here reg’ment.
He’s a whale.”6
“Didn’t I tell yeh we’d come aroun’ in behint ’em? Didn’t
I tell yeh so? We—”
“Oh, shet yeh mouth!”
For a time this pursuing recollection of the tattered man
took all elation from the youth’s veins. He saw his vivid
error, and he was afraid that it would stand before him all his
life. He took no share in the chatter of his comrades, nor did
he look at them or know them, save when he felt sudden suspicion
that they were seeing his thoughts and scrutinizing
each detail of the scene with the tattered soldier.
Yet gradually he mustered force to put the sin at a distance.
And at last his eyes seemed to open to some new ways.
He found that he could look back upon the brass and bombast
of his earlier gospels and see them truly. He was gleeful
when he discovered that he now despised them.
With this conviction came a store of assurance. He felt a
quiet manhood, nonassertive but of sturdy and strong blood.
He knew that he would no more quail before his guides
wherever they should point. He had been to touch the great
death, and found that, after all, it was but the great death. He
was a man.
So it came to pass that as he trudged from the place of
blood and wrath his soul changed. He came from hot plowshares7
to prospects of clover8 tranquility, and it was as if hot
plowshares were not. Scars faded as flowers.
It rained. The procession of weary soldiers became a
bedraggled train, despondent and muttering, marching with
churning9 effort in a trough of liquid brown mud under a
low, wretched sky. Yet the youth smiled, for he saw that the
world was a world for him, though many discovered it to be
148 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
5. plum. Plumb, directly, squarely
6. whale. Great fellow
7. hot plowshares. Plowshare—part of a plow that cuts a furrow or groove in
the ground. Here, implies weapons and alludes to a line from the Bible: “They
shall beat their swords into plowshares”
8. prospects of clover. A pleasant and peaceful place
9. churning. Difficult (like moving through a thick, heavy substance)
WWords
For
Everyday
Use
mus • ter (məs´tər) vt., cause to gather
brass (bras) n., bold self-assurance
bom • bast (bəm´bast) n., pretentious
inflated speech or writing
quail (kwa￣(ə)l) vi., draw back in dread or
terror; cower
wrath (rath) n., strong vengeful anger
pros • pect (prə´spekt) n., place that commands
an extensive view; mental picture
of something to come
be • drag • gled (bi dra´gəld) adj., soiled
and stained by or as if by trailing in mud
_ What does the
youth gather force to
do? What does he
think about the
beliefs he held before
going into battle?
_ What does the
youth feel growing
within him? What
has the youth
become?
made of oaths and walking sticks. He had rid himself of the
red sickness of battle. The sultry nightmare was in the past.
He had been an animal blistered and sweating in the heat
and pain of war. He turned now with a lover’s thirst to
images of tranquil skies, fresh meadows, cool brooks—an
existence of soft and eternal peace.
Over the river a golden ray of sun came through the hosts
of leaden rain clouds.
CHAPTER 24 149 WWords
For
Everyday
Use
sul • try (səl´tre￣) adj., hot with passion or anger
lead • en (le´d_n) adj., of the color of lead, or dull gray;
heavy
_ What is in the
past for the youth?
For what is he eager
now?
Respond to the Selection
Describe a time when someone belittled you for some reason. How did you feel?
How did you react? Did you accept the criticism, or did you struggle to prove
the person who belittled you wrong?
Investigate, Inquire, and Imagine
150 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
Recall: GATHERING FACTS
1a. In Chapter 21, what do the veteran
soldiers say when Henry’s (the
youth’s) regiment returns from battle?
What does Henry realize when
he looks back from safety at the battleground?
What does an officer say
to criticize Henry’s regiment? What
happens to make Henry and Wilson
(his friend) feel better about themselves
at the end of Chapter 21?
2a. In Chapter 22, when Henry’s
regiment is engaged in battle again,
what does he believe will be a “great
and salt” reproach on the officer
who called them mule drivers and
mud diggers? What attitude does
Henry have toward danger and
death in the charge that takes place
in Chapter 23? What does Wilson
accomplish in this charge? What
does Henry’s regiment capture?
3a. In Chapter 24, when Henry has
time to reflect on his actions, how
does he feel about his public
actions? What does he remember
about his private actions? What
thought haunts him? What does
Henry “muster force” to do? How
does he now feel about his earlier
boasts about war? What does the
narrator say has happened to
Henry’s soul?
Interpret: FINDING MEANING
1b. Look back to the end of Chapter
20, and explain whether you
expected Henry’s regiment to be
treated this way on their return.
What do you think the author might
be indicating about heroism? To
what extent is public recognition
important in making someone feel
heroic? Do you think public recognition
is important in making someone
a hero? Explain.
2b. How is Henry beginning to feel
about himself as a soldier? Explain
whether Henry has earned the right
to think of himself in this way.
Explain why this charge can be considered
a victory, while the previous
one could not.
3b. What does Henry now recognize
about the character of the tattered
man? In Chapter 20, Crane wrote of
Henry’s regiment, “And they were
men.” At the end of this novel,
Crane repeats this ideas but focuses
specifically on Henry, writing “He
was a man.” Why is Henry more of
an adult now than he was at the end
of Chapter 20?
➛
➛
➛
Understanding Literature
Character. A character is a person or animal who takes part in the action of a
literary work. A one-dimensional character, flat character, or caricature is one
who exhibits a single quality. A three-dimensional, full, or rounded character
is one who seems to have all the complexities of an actual human being. In
what way would you classify Henry Fleming? In what way would you classify the
tattered man? Explain your choices.
Symbol and Cliché. A symbol is a thing that stands for or represents both itself
and something else. A cliché is an overused expression such as happy as a lark
or time is money. A symbol that has now become so common it is considered a
cliché closes this novel. What is this symbol and what does it represent? Did you
find this line effective? Do you think Crane’s original audience would have found
it effective?
Metaphor. A metaphor is a figure of speech in which one thing is written about
as if it were another. This figure of speech invites the reader or listener to make a
comparison between the two things. Explain what is being compared in the following
lines: “It appeared that the swift wings of their desires would have shattered
against the iron gates of the impossible.” In what way are the things being
compared alike?
CHAPTERS 21–24 151
Analyze: TAKING THINGS APART
4a. Identify some of the different
ideas about what it means to be a
hero presented not only in Chapters
21–24, but in the novel as a whole.
What vision of heroism do you think
was portrayed at the novel’s end?
What did you learn about what it
means to be a hero, both publicly
and privately?
Evaluate: MAKING JUDGMENTS
5a. Which of Henry’s experiences in
the war would you say has had the
most effect on shaping him as a person?
Explain why this event had
such a strong effect on Henry using
evidence from the text to support
your opinion.
Synthesize: BRINGING THINGS TOGETHER
4b. This novel is as much about
growing up as it is about heroism.
What do these two central ideas,
heroism and growing up, have to do
with each other? Explore how you
think these ideas are related.
Extend: CONNECTING IDEAS
5b. If you lived in Henry’s time,
would you want to get to know him?
Summarize how your feelings about
Henry have changed over the course
of the novel. When did you like him
the most? When did you like him the
least? Do you respect him? In what
ways are you like him and in what
ways are you different from him?
➛
➛
Plot Analysis of The Red Badge of Courage
The following diagram, known as Freytag’s pyramid, illustrates
the main plot of The Red Badge of Courage. For definitions
and more information on the parts of a plot illustrated
below, see the Handbook of Literary Terms on page 181.
The parts of a plot are as follows:
The exposition is the part of a plot that provides background
information about the characters, setting, or conflict.
The inciting incident is the event that introduces the central
conflict.
The rising action, or complication, develops the conflict
to a high point of intensity.
The climax is the high point of interest or suspense in the
story.
The falling action is all the events that follow the climax.
The resolution is the point at which the central conflict is
ended, or resolved.
The dénouement is any material that follows the resolution
and that ties up loose ends.
Exposition (A)
The opening chapters of this novel introduce the main
characters and the setting. The reader is introduced to Henry
Fleming (also called “the youth”) who is inexperienced in
battle although he has always dreamed of war as a romantic
struggle. The reader also meets some of his fellow soldiers in
the 304th regiment, Jim Conklin (also called “the tall soldier”)
and Wilson (“the loud soldier”). In a flashback, Henry
remembers how he enlisted in the war despite his mother’s
152 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
FREYTAG’S PYRAMID
Rising Action (C)
Inciting Incident
(B)
Exposition (A)
Falling Action (E)
Climax
(D)
Resolution
(F)
Dénouement (G)
wishes. He also remembers her reaction to hearing that he
had enlisted and her advice—not to think he can fight the
whole rebel army but to do what is right, to send her his
socks to be darned, and to steer clear of bad company. After
he enlists, Henry marches through Washington, but then
settles down into camp where he spends some boring
months marching, drilling (training), and being reviewed.
Inciting Incident (B)
Jim Conklin spreads the news that the regiment will be
moving and that the new recruits will soon take part in battle.
This news fills Henry with self-doubt; he wonders
whether he will have the courage to stand and fight or
whether he will run. He asks his fellow soldiers, Jim Conklin
and Wilson, if they share his fears but they seem mostly confident
that they will perform well in battle, making Henry
feel dejected and alone. Although the 304th regiment is not
sent to battle the next day, Jim’s gossip is not proved to be
entirely baseless. Soon, the 304th regiment is marched to the
field of battle. Just before the first fight, Henry’s friend
Wilson (the loud soldier) admits that he fears that he will die
in the skirmish about to take place. The regiment sees their
first corpse, and they witness a regiment of men fleeing in
terror to the mockery of the veteran troops. Henry is filled
with fear when he sees the soldiers fleeing, sensing that he
too will surely follow their lead if the enemy is as terrifying as
they seem to be. In the first skirmish, the soldiers of the 304th
fight and Henry experiences the physical discomfort of the
smoke, heat, and toil of battle. The 304th regiment drives
back the enemy only to realize that this has been the first
fight of many, and that the battle is unfolding all about them.
Rising Action (C)
Henry is exhausted and when the enemy charges again
feels that they are unstoppable. Men from the 304th begin to
flee. In a moment of panic, certain that they will all be killed,
Henry, too, drops his rifle and runs from battle. He soon
learns, however, that the Union forces were not defeated or
killed. Instead, they have held and thrown back the enemy
forces. Henry is filled with mixed emotions about what he has
done. He feels shame and yet he tries to justify his actions to
himself. Turning to a calm and beautiful spot in the wood for
relief from the scenes of battle, Henry is horrified to discover
the decaying corpse of a soldier in a chapel-like clearing in the
woods. Once again, Henry flees in terror of death.
PLOT ANALYSIS OF THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE 153
Climax (D)
Henry moves again toward the roar and clash of battle,
fascinated as much as terrified by it. On a road, he meets up
with a group of wounded soldiers; many of this group are
maimed horribly, including a “spectral soldier” who appears
to be about to die. Henry wishes that he too was wounded,
that he had a “red badge of courage” which could help
soothe his own shame. One of the wounded men, described
as a “tattered soldier,” tries to befriend Henry, but then asks
him where he has been injured. The question fills Henry
with shame and panic, and he wanders away from the tattered
soldier. Henry then realizes that the “spectral soldier”
who is so terribly injured is none other than his companion
Jim Conklin, the tall soldier. Henry is filled with grief and
rushes to take care of his friend. Henry is rejoined by the tattered
soldier and the two move Jim into a field, away from
the heavily-traveled road. Jim begins to behave strangely and
takes off running through the field. He comes to a particular
spot and then begins to convulse and die as Henry and the
tattered soldier watch helpless and spellbound in horror.
Henry is filled with the urge to make a speech expressing his
emotion but can only shake his fist in helpless rage. Henry’s
new companion, the tattered man, announces that they
should move on, saying that he himself isn’t feeling well.
Henry notices that the tattered soldier is beginning to look
blue and wobbly. The tattered man says he cannot die yet
because he has responsibilities—he is the father of two children.
The tattered man again asks Henry about his own supposed
injuries, expressing concern over them and reawakening
Henry’s feeling of shame. The tattered man begins to
behave strangely, calling Henry by the name of one of his
old friends. Henry bids the tattered soldier good-bye in a
“hard” voice, and leaves the helpless, dying soldier alone
wandering in the field.
Falling Action (E)
Henry witnesses a regiment of men fleeing in great panic
from the enemy. Henry is granted his wish for a wound
when he tries to stop one of the fleeing soldiers to ask him
what happened. The terrified soldier bashes Henry over the
head with his gun. Henry wanders injured and disoriented
until he is helped by a soldier with a cheery voice who leads
him back to his regiment. There, Henry is greeted by his
friend Wilson (the loud soldier). Henry lies to his friend and
154 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
to the corporal of the regiment, saying he was separated
from the regiment, had fought with other regiments, and
had been shot in the head. Wilson cares for Henry kindly
and reveals that he has become less of a braggart and more
of a friend.
Resolution (F)
The next morning, Henry and the 304th regiment return
to the battlefield, where Henry surprises both himself and
the other men by shooting at the enemy long after they have
retreated. The regiment is then asked to perform a dangerous
charge by officers who doubt their abilities, calling them
mule drivers, and doubt that many of them will survive.
Henry and Wilson behave courageously and heroically in the
charge, and Henry carries the regiment’s flag after the colorbearer
is killed. Although the regiment’s charge falls short of
success and the regiment is labeled as mud diggers, an officer
singles out Henry and Wilson for praise. In the next skirmish,
Henry fights fiercely driven by the desire to avenge
himself upon the officer who labeled them as mud diggers by
proving his valor. Wilson captures the enemy’s flag, and the
regiment captures four enemy soldiers. The regiment celebrates
their victory.
Dénouement (G)
Henry and the other soldiers march back to camp from
the field of battle, and Henry has some time to think about
his experiences and actions and to assess them. He remembers
his “public actions” in battle with pride, but he thinks
back on his hidden, secret actions—his running from battle
and his desertion of the tattered soldier—with shame. The
memory of abandoning the tattered soldier is particularly
haunting. Henry tries to reconcile his conflicting feelings
and put them into perspective. He realizes he must live with
all his actions, both praiseworthy and blameworthy, and
feels that he has grown. He looks back upon his earlier beliefs
about war and death as pompous. He looks forward to a
peaceful life outside of battle.
PLOT ANALYSIS OF THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE 155
156 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
Creative Writing Activities
Creative Writing Activity A: Personal Essay
about Growing Up
What experience in your own life do you see as most
important on your road from childhood to adulthood? What
have you done or what has happened to you to make you feel
that you are growing up? What do you think about this event
in your life? In what way has it changed you? Freewrite your
responses to these questions. Then, work with the response
that interests you most and expand it into an essay about an
experience that helped you to grow up. Reflect on both sides
of growing up—what you lose as well as what you gain.
Creative Writing Activity B: Exploring Other
Points of View
The Red Badge of Courage focuses on Henry Fleming’s point
of view and his experiences. The novel also includes other
characters with distinct personalities. How might some of
these characters regard Henry’s actions or the same events he
witnesses? Choose a brief scene from the story and retell it
from another character’s point of view. You may choose a
topic from the list that follows, or choose another scene and
character that capture your imagination. Before writing, create
a Venn diagram to compare and contrast Henry’s point of
view with the thoughts and feelings you imagine your chosen
character must be experiencing. Remember to base your perceptions
of the chosen character’s thoughts and feelings on
what Crane reveals about that character in the novel. For
example, you probably wouldn’t want to describe Henry’s
mother as being eager to see her son go off to battle. Use your
Venn diagram as a source of ideas when rewriting a few paragraphs
of a scene from another character’s point of view.
Henry’s
point of
view
Other
character’s
point of
view
Possible Topics:
• Retell the scene when Wilson admits he fears that he will
die in battle (in Chapter 3), from Wilson’s point of view
• Retell the scene (from Chapter 10) in which Henry leaves
the tattered man alone to die, from the tattered man’s
point of view
• Retell the scene (in Chapter 13) in which Henry returns to
the camp, says he was shot in the head, and is cared for by
Wilson, from Wilson’s point of view
Creative Writing Activity C: Realistic Descriptions
Crane’s writing is vivid and realistic. He is able to capture
both beautiful and horrible images that seem true to life.
Almost in the same breath, he describes a natural setting and
a corpse:
At length he reached a place where the high, arching
boughs made a chapel. He softly pushed the green
doors aside and entered. Pine needles were a gentle
brown carpet. There was a religious half light. . . .
. . . The corpse was dressed in a uniform that once
had been blue, but was now faded to a melancholy
shade of green. The eyes, staring at the youth, had
changed to the dull hue to be seen on the side of a dead
fish. The mouth was open. Its red had changed to an
appalling yellow. Over the gray skin of the face ran little
ants. One was trundling some sort of bundle along
the upper lip.
Crane makes these scenes realistic by using sensory
details—images of things that can be seen, heard, touched,
tasted, or smelled. You can see and feel the gentle brown carpet
of pine needles. You can see and feel the ant trundling a
bundle across a lip. Write your own realistic descriptive paragraphs.
One should describe something beautiful and one
should describe something that is horrible, frightening, or
ugly. After you decide on a topic for each paragraph, fill out
two sensory detail charts, listing details that you can see,
hear, feel, touch, or taste for each topic. Use the charts as a
CREATIVE WRITING ACTIVITIES 157
Sensory Detail Chart
Sight Hearing Touch Taste Smell
Critical Writing Activities
The following topics are suitable for short critical essays
on The Red Badge of Courage. An essay written on one of these
topics should begin with an introductory paragraph that
states the thesis, or main idea, of the essay. The introductory
paragraph should be followed by several paragraphs that
support the thesis, using examples from the novel. The essay
should conclude with a paragraph that summarizes the
points made in the body of the essay and that reinforces the
thesis.
Critical Writing Activity A: Growing Up—A Different
Type of Battle
Think about what the phrase growing up means to you and
freewrite your ideas about the following questions: What
activities or events do you associate with growing up? Do
you think of growing up as a gradual activity or a sudden
one? Are there any situations in which a person is forced to
grow up suddenly? What mental or emotional changes does
growing up cause in a person?
Use the ideas you have gathered to help you develop a
thesis in response to the following group of questions: In
what way does Henry Fleming’s character grow up over the
course of the novel? How is he different at the novel’s end
than he was at its beginning? What has he left behind and
what has he gained? What has inspired or forced Henry to
grow up?
After you have developed an opinion about the topic of
growing up in The Red Badge of Courage, state it in a thesis
sentence, introduced in your first paragraph. Support your
thesis with clearly organized paragraphs and evidence from
the text. Form a conclusion in your final paragraph.
Critical Writing Activity B: Comparing and Contrasting
War Literature
Compare and contrast the way Crane presents war in The
Red Badge of Courage with the way another work of literature
or a film presents war. The other work you choose does not
have to be set in the Civil War. For example, you might
158 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
CRITICAL WRITING ACTIVITIES 159
choose to compare The Red Badge of Courage to a film you
have seen about World War II or the Vietnam War.
Remember, however, that you should choose the other work
wisely; there should be a basis for comparison, or a reason
why the reader would find the comparison and contrast
interesting.
You might start by identifying the message, if any, each
work conveys about war and the way in which war is
described in each work. Organize your thoughts into a Venn
diagram, where you include similarities in the place where
the circles join and differences outside the intersection of circles
(see the sample Venn diagram below). Use the ideas in
the Venn diagram as inspiration for developing the thesis
you will express in your introductory paragraph. Remember
to support your thesis with evidence from both works in the
body of your essay, and write a final paragraph concluding
your comparison of the two.
The Red
Badge
of Courage
Other
Work
Projects
Project A: Examining History—The Civil War
Work in small groups of three to four students to prepare
an oral report on some aspect of the American Civil War.
Your group should research your topic in encyclopedias
(either print or electronic versions), in online articles on the
Internet, and in books or periodicals. Take notes on your
findings, and gather any multimedia resources you wish to
present, such as reproductions of photographs, maps, or
recordings of songs. Your group should then prepare an outline
of the information it plans to share with the rest of the
class. Your presentation should be no more than five to
seven minutes in length. Practice your presentation with
your group so that it is as polished as possible. Remember to
look at your audience when speaking and to vary your tone
to keep the audience’s interest. The key to success in this presentation
is to choose a topic that is narrow enough for you
to explore. Remember that whole books have been written
on the Civil War so you cannot cover all of it. Here are some
possible topics.
• Stephen Crane mentions Union soldiers wearing blue and
Confederate soldiers wearing gray. Is this all there was to a
soldier’s uniform? What different types of uniforms did
soldiers from both sides wear?
• Focus on life in camp instead of life during the battle.
What was a day in the life of a typical soldier like? What
did soldiers do at camp? What did they eat? What did they
do for entertainment?
• Crane mentions maimed soldiers and amputation. What
were medical conditions like in the Civil War? What problems
did Civil War doctors face and how did they treat the
wounded?
• Choose a major battle of the Civil War and explain what
happened and its importance in the war as a whole.
Possible choices include the First Battle of Bull Run, the
Second Battle of Bull Run, the Battle of Chancellorsville,
the Battle of Gettysburg, or the Battle of the Wilderness.
You might also wish to explore Sherman’s march to the sea.
• Crane makes no mention of the racial issues behind the
Civil War. What role did African Americans play as soldiers
in the war, either for Union forces or Confederate forces?
160 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
Project B: Portraying War in Art
The Civil War was one of the first wars to be documented
in photographs. Photography was developed just before the
Civil War was fought, and late nineteenth-century photographers
captured powerful images of soldiers and battlefields,
allowing the average person to see realistic images of war for
the first time. Prepare a brief portfolio of images of war
expressed visually in painting, sculpture, sketches, drawings,
or photographs. Your portfolio should include at least one
reproduction of a photograph taken during the Civil War.
You can find such photos in your school or local library and
photocopy them or you may print images you find on the
Internet. As a comparison, find at least one image of war
from an earlier period. You might, for example, try to find an
image of war in ancient Greek or Roman art existing in
sculptures or on vases to contrast the heroic images of war in
Henry’s imagination with the more realistic photographs.
You might also wish to include your own artistic representations
of war in a sketch, drawing, or painting. Write captions
for each of your images explaining when and where your art
came from, the artist, and the title. Your class might create a
bulletin board showing images of war. Vote on which images
to include. Try to capture many different types of images.
Project C: Role Playing a Scene from the Novel
Working in groups of two to three students, enact a scene
from the novel for your classmates. Your group should
choose a scene that you would like to dramatize, and determine
who will play which part. As a group, discuss what
each character will do and say. While you should restrict
your actions to be realistic to the novel, you can add dialog
as needed to convey the scene, because much of the novel
focuses on what is going on in Henry’s mind. For example,
you might choose to enact the scene in which Henry and the
tattered man helplessly watch Jim Conklin die. The scene
you enact should be brief. Do not announce to your audience
which scene you are performing. After each group performs
their scene from the novel, the rest of the class should
try to guess what scene the group has performed. After all
groups have performed their scenes, vote on the top three
groups you believe enacted scenes most vividly and realistically.
You may want to videotape the performances.
PROJECTS 161
Project D: Listening to the Voices of Wartime
While The Red Badge of Courage is a work of fiction, there
are many nonfiction accounts of war written or told by the
people who lived through it. Research the story of someone
who lived through a war, and excerpt a paragraph or two
that you find describes war in a particularly memorable way.
The accounts of many Civil War veterans exist in letters and
nonfiction excerpts. You can find such accounts in your
school or local library. You might also turn to literature. The
British soldiers Rupert Brooke and Wilfred Owen both wrote
striking poetry about World War I. You might also choose to
find a paragraph or two from Anne Frank’s diary or Elie
Wiesel’s Night; both writers experienced the horrors of World
War II. You might also choose to interview a family member
or friend who has lived through or participated in a war to
gather their firsthand experiences.
After you have selected the passage you would like to
quote, prepare an oral interpretation of this person’s account
of war for your classmates. Remember that the effectiveness
of your interpretation depends on how you use and vary verbal
and nonverbal elements of communication to engage
your audience’s interest. Practice varying your tone of voice
and your pitch aloud and experiment with maintaining eye
contact and with making gestures in a mirror before you
deliver your oral interpretation.
162 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
abash (ə bash´) vt., destroy the self-possession or self-confidence
of
abide (ə b_￣d´) vt., bear patiently; accept without objection
ab • ject (ab´jekt) adj., cast down in spirit; sunk to or existing in a
low state or condition
abom • i • na • ble (ə bəm´nə bəl) adj., of or causing disgust or
hatred
ac • cost (ə kôst´) vt., approach and speak in a challenging or
aggressive way
ac • cou • tre • ment or ac • cou • ter • ment (ə ko—_o´trə mənt)
n., equipment, trappings
ad • her • ent (ad hir´ənt) n., believer in, especially of a particular
idea or church; follower
adroit • ly (ə drôit´le￣) adv., skillfully, dexterously
af • fa • bly (a´fə ble￣) adv., pleasantly; in a friendly manner
ag • gre • ga • tion (a gri ga￣´shən) n., group, body, or mass
GLOSSARY 163
Glossary
PRONUNCIATION KEY
VOWEL SOUNDS
a hat
a￣ play
ä star
e then
e￣ me
i sit
￣_ my
o￣ go
ô paw, born
book, put
blue, stew
oi boy
ou wow
u up
_ burn
ə extra
under
civil
honor
bogus
CONSONANT SOUNDS
b but
ch watch
d do
f fudge
_ go
h hot
j jump
k brick
l lip
m money
n on
ŋ song, sink
p pop
r rod
s see
sh she
t sit
th with
v valley
w work
y yell
z pleasure
o_o
o—_o
composed of many distinct parts or individuals
aghast (ə gast´) adj., struck with terror, amazement, or horror
ague (a￣´gyo—_o) n., fit of shivering
ail • ment (al´mənt) n., bodily disorder or chronic disease
air • i • ly (ar´ə le￣) adv., in a light and graceful manner; proudly
al • leged (ə lejd´) adj., asserted without proof or before proving
al • ter • ca • tion (äl tər ka￣´shən) n., noisy heated angry dispute
or quarrel
an • ec • dote (a´nik do￣t) n., short account of an interesting,
amusing, or biographical incident
an • ni • hi • late (ə n_￣´ə la￣t) vt., cause to cease to exist; kill
an • tag • o • nist (an ta´gə nist) n., one that contends with or
opposes another
an • tag • o • nize (an ta´gə n_￣z) vt., act in opposition to; provoke
the hostility of
ap • pall • ing (ə pôl´iŋ) adj., inspiring horror, dismay, or disgust
ar • dor (är´dər) n., extreme vigor or energy; zeal
ar • ray (ə ra￣´) n., grouping or arrangement
ash • en (a´shən) adj., resembling ashes (as in color); deadly pale
as • sail (ə sa￣l´) vt., attack violently with blows or words
as • sent (ə sent´) n., agreement; consent
a • ver • sion (ə vər´zhən) n., feeling of repulsion or distaste
toward something with a desire to avoid or turn from it
ban • dy (ban´de￣) vt., toss from side to side carelessly
barb (bärb) n., biting or pointedly critical remark or comment
bar • ri • cade (bar´ə ka￣d) n., barrier thrown up across a way or
passage to check the advance of the enemy
bask (bask) vi., take pleasure or obtain enjoyment
bat • ed (ba￣t´əd) adj., restrained; reduced in force or intensity
bawl (bôl) vi., cry out at the top of one’s voice
bay (ba￣) n., position of one unable to retreat and forced to face
danger
be • drag • gled (bi dra´gəld) adj., soiled and stained by or as if
by trailing in mud
be • la • bor (bi la￣´bər) vt., attack verbally
164 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
be • rate (bi ra￣t´) vt., scold or condemn strongly and at length
be • seech (bi se￣ch´) vt., beg for urgently or anxiously
be • set (bi set´) vi., set upon; attack
be • wil • der (bi wil´dər) vt., perplex or confuse
bil • low • ing (bi´lo￣ iŋ) adj., rising or rolling in waves
blanch (blanch) vi., become white or pale
blar • ing (blar´iŋ) n., loud sound
bla • tant (bla´t_nt) adj., completely obvious, conspicuous, or
obtrusive especially in a crass or offensive manner
bleat (ble￣t) vi., whimper; talk complainingly or with a whine
blithe (bl_￣th) adj., lighthearted; merry
blus • ter (blus´tər) n., violent commotion
bom • bast (bəm´bast) n., pretentious inflated speech or writing
brass (bras) n., bold self-assurance
bra • zen (bra￣´z_n) adj., marked by contemptuous boldness
bris • tle (bri´səl) vi., take on an aggressive attitude or appearance
brood (bro—_od) vi., dwell gloomily on a subject
ce • ler • i • ty (sə ler´ə te￣) n., quickness of motion or action
clam • or (kla´mər) vi., become loudly insistent
clan • nish (kla´nish) adj., of or relating to a close group
co • her • ent (co￣ hir´ənt) adj., logically ordered; consistent
com • mis • er • a • tion (kə mi zə ra￣´shən) n., sympathy; compassion
com • mon • place (kə´mən pla￣s) n., something commonly found
com • mo • tion (kə mo￣´shən) n., excitement or confusion
com • pre • hen • sive • ly (kôm pri hen(t)´siv le￣) adv., completely
or broadly
com • punc • tion (kəm pəŋ(k)´shən) n., anxiety arising from
awareness of guilt
con • ceit (kən se￣t´) n., fanciful idea
con • cil • i • ate (kən si´le￣ a￣t) vt., gain (as goodwill) by pleasing
acts
con • cil • i • at • ing (kən si´le￣ a￣t iŋ) adj., compatible; reconciling;
appeasing
GLOSSARY 165
con • de • scen • sion (kən di sen(t)´shən) n., voluntary descent
from one’s rank or dignity in relations with an inferior
con • sign (kən s_￣n´) vt., give, transfer, or deliver into the hands
or control of another; commit to a final destination or fate
con • ster • na • tion (kôn stər na￣´shən) n., amazement or dismay
that hinders or throws into confusion
con • tem • pla • tive (kən tem´plə tiv) adj., marked by or given
to thought or consideration
con • tor • tion (kən tôr´shən) n., violent twist; twisted, strained
shape
con • triv • ance (kən tr_￣´vən(t)s) n., artificial arrangement or
development
con • ven • tion • al (kôn ven´shən əl) adj., ordinary, commonplace
con • vul • sive (kən vəl´siv) adj., violent, sudden, frantic, or spasmodic
coun • te • nance (kaun´t_n ən(t)s) n., look, expression
co • vert • ly (ko￣´vərt le￣) adv., not openly; secretly
cra • ven (kra￣´vən) adj., lacking the least bit of courage
creed (kre￣d) n., set of fundamental beliefs; guiding principle
cre • scen • do (krə shen´do￣) n., a gradual increase, especially in
reference to music
crone (kro￣n) n., withered old woman
daunt • less (dônt´ləs) adj., fearless
dead • ened (de´d_nd) adj., impaired in vigor or sensation
de • bauch (di bôch´) n., corrupt activity
dec • la • ma • tion (de klə ma￣´shən) n., behavior toward others;
outward manner
de • flec • tion (di flek´shən) n., turning aside or off course
de • jec • tion (di jek´shən) n., lowness of spirits
de • lib • er • a • tion (di li´bə ra￣´shən) n., consideration,
thought
de • lir • i • ous • ly (di lir´e￣ əs le￣) adv., in an irrational manner
de • lir • i • um (di lir´e￣ əm) n., frenzied excitement
de • mure (di myur´) adj., reserved, modest, serious
de • note (di no￣t´) vt., make known
166 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
de • nounce (di naun(t)s´) vt., declare publicly to be blameworthy
or evil
de • nun • ci • a • tion (di nən(t) se￣ a￣´shən) n., public condemnation
de • plet • ed (di ple￣t´əd) adj., reduced in number
dep • re • cat • ing (de´pri ka￣t iŋ) adj., playing down; making little
of
de • ri • sion (di ri´zhən) n., the use of ridicule or scorn to show
contempt
de • ri • sive (di r_￣´siv) adj., expressing or causing scorn or mockery
de • spi • ca • ble (di spi´kə bəl) adj., so worthless or obnoxious
as to rouse moral indignation
de • spon • dent (di spən´dənt) adj., feeling or showing extreme
discouragement, dejection, or depression
dev • o • tee (de vô te￣´) n., ardent follower, supporter, or enthusiast
(as of a religion, art form, or sport)
dex • ter • ous • ly (dek´stə rəs le￣) adv., skillfully
din • gy (din´je￣) adj., dirty, shabby
dis • cern (di sərn´) vt., detect with the eyes
dis • clos • ing (dis klo￣z´iŋ) adj., exposing to view; revealing
dis • com • fit • ed (dis kum´fət əd), n., the defeated in battle
dis • cre • tion (dis kre´shən) n., ability to make responsible decisions
dis • dain (dis da￣n´) vt., refuse or abstain from because of scorn;
contempt, scorn
dis • may (dis ma￣´) vt., deprive of courage or resolution through
fear or anxiety
dis • sec • tion (di sek´shən) n., act or process of analyzing and
interpreting something in detail
di • ver • sion (də vər´zhən) n., attack that draws the attention
and force of an enemy from the point of the main operation
doc • ile (də´səl) adj., easily led or managed; obedient
dog (dôg) vt., hunt or track like a dog
dog • ged • ly (dô´gəd le￣) adv., in a manner marked by stubborn
determination
dog • ger • el (dô´gə rəl) n., verse styled for comic effect or to
GLOSSARY 167
mock
dog • ging (dôg´iŋ) adj., worrying, pursuing as a dog does prey
dole • ful (do￣l´fəl) adj., full of grief
drawn (drôn) adj., showing the effects of tension, pain, or illness
drea • ry (drir´e￣) adj., feeling, displaying, or reflecting listlessness
or discouragement
dumb • found or dum • found (dəm faund´) vt., perplex; puzzle
dun (dun) adj., having a dull grayish yellow color
ed • dy (e´de￣) vi., move in a circle, like a whirlpool
ed • i • fice (e´dəfəs) n., building
ef • face (e fa￣s´) vt., cause to vanish
ela • tion (e la￣´shən) n., extreme joy
el • o • quent (e´lə kwənt) adj., marked by forceful and fluent
expression
e • nam • eled (e na´məld) adj., covered with a glossy, hard surface
en • deav • or (en de´vər) n., serious determined effort
en • dow (en dau´) vt., provide with something freely or naturally
en • grossed (en gro￣sd´) adj., completely occupied, engaged, or
involved
en • gross • ing (en gro￣´siŋ) adj., occupying the attention completely
en • light • ened (en l_￣´tend) adj., freed from ignorance and misinformation
en • shrine (en shr_￣n´) vt., preserve or cherish as sacred
ep • i • thet (e´pə thet) n., disparaging or abusive word or
phrase
ethe • re • al (e thir´e￣ əl) adj., of or relating to the regions
beyond the earth
ex • alt (eg zôlt´) vt., raise in rank, power, or character
ex • as • per • at • ed (eg zas´pər a￣t əd) adj., enraged, irritated,
annoyed
ex • er • tion (eg zər´shən) n., laborious or perceptible effort;
fatiguing effort
ex • hor • ta • tion (ek sôr ta￣´shən) n., language intended to
incite and encourage
168 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
ex • pen • di • ture (ek spen´di chər) n., act or process of
expending; outlay
ex • ple • tive (ek´splə tiv) n., exclamatory word or phrase, especially
a swear or a curse
ex • tri • cate (ek´strə ka￣t) vt., free or remove from an entaglement
or difficulty
ex • ul • tant (eg zul´tənt) adj., filled with or expressing great joy
or triumph
fa • ce • tious (fə se￣´shəs) adj., joking or jesting often inappropriately
fal • ter • ing (fôl´tər iŋ) n., weak or broken stammer or hesitation
fath • om (fa´thəm) vt., penetrate and come to understand
feign (fa￣n) vi., pretend
fe • lic • i • tate (fi li´sə ta￣t) vt., offer congratulations to
flinch (flinch) vt., withdraw or shrink from or as if from pain
floun • der (floun´dər) vi., struggle to move or obtain footing;
thrash about wildly
flout (flout) vt., treat with contemptuous disregard; scorn
flush (fləsh) vi., blush
fo • liage (fo￣´le￣ ij) n., cluster of leaves, flowers, and branches
for • mi • da • ble (fôr´mə də bəl) adj., having qualities that discourage
approach or attack; causing fear, dread, or apprehension
for • mu • la (fôr´myo—_o lə) n., conventionalized statement
intended to express some fundamental truth or principle
for • ti • tude (fôr´tə to—_od) n., strength of mind that enables a
person to encounter danger or bear pain or adversity with
courage
fra • cas (fra￣´kəs) n., noisy quarrel; brawl
fren • zied • ly (fren´ze￣d le￣) adv., in a furious and wild manner
fret (fret) vi., become vexed or worried
fringe (frinj) n., edge
fume (fyo—_om) vi., be in a state of excited irritation or anger
fur • row (fər´o￣) n., trench in the earth, usually made by a plow
gab • ble (ga´bəl) vt., say with incoherent rapidity; babble
gait (ga￣t) n., manner of walking or moving on foot
gall • ing (gô´liŋ) adj., especially irritating
GLOSSARY 169
gaunt (gônt) adj., excessively thin and angular
ges • tic • u • late (je sti´kyo—_o la￣t) vi., make gestures especially
when speaking
gild • ed (gil´dəd) adj., overlaid with or as if with gold; given an
attractive but sometimes deceptive appearance
gird (gərd) vt., encircle; surround
glib • ness (glib´nəs) n., ease and fluency in speaking or writing
often to the point of being insincere or deceitful
glint • ing (glint´iŋ) adj., reflecting in brilliant flashes; gleaming
gory (go￣r´e) adj., bloodstained
griev • ous (gre￣´vəs) adj., serious; burdensome
grove (gro￣v) n., small wood without underbrush
gy • rate (j_￣´ra￣t) vi., swing with a circular or spiral motion
hag • gard (ha´gərd) adj., having a worn or emaciated appearance
ha • rangue (hə raŋ´) vi., make a ranting speech
ha • rass (hə ras´) vt., annoy persistently
ha • ven (ha￣´vən) n., place of safety
head • long (hed lôŋ´) adv., headfirst
heave (he￣v) vi., rise and fall rhythmically
heed • less (he￣d´ləs) adj., inconsiderate, thoughtless
he • ral • dic (he ral´dik) adj., of or relating to a bearer of news
here • to • fore (hir´tə fo￣r) adv., up to this time
horde (ho￣rd) n., crowd or throng
ilk (ilk) n., sort, kind
im • ma • te • ri • al (i mə tir´e￣ əl) adj., of no substantial consequence;
unimportant
im • pel (im pel´) vt., force
im • pend • ing (im pend´iŋ) adj., about to occur
im • pe • ri • ous (im pir´e￣ əs) adj., commanding; intensely compelling
im • pe • tus (im´pə təs) n., driving force; stimulus
im • pre • ca • tion (im pri ka´shən) n., curse
im • preg • na • ble (im preg´nə bəl) adj., incapable of being
taken by assault; unconquerable
170 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
in • dif • fer • ent (in di´fərnt) adj., marked by a lack of interest,
enthusiasm, or concern for something
in • dig • nant • ly (in dig´nənt le￣) adv., in a righteously angry, or
displeased, manner
in • dig • na • tion (in dig na￣´shən) n., anger aroused by something
unjust, unworthy, or mean
in • fan • tile (in´fən t_￣l) adj., suitable to or characteristic of an
infant; very immature
in • fer • nal (in fər´nəl) adj., of or relating to a nether world of
the dead
in • so • lent (in´sə lənt) adj., insultingly contemptuous in speech
or conduct
in • ter • mi • na • ble (in tərm´nə bəl) adj., having or seeming
to have no end
in • ter • mit • tent (in tər mi´t_nt) adj., coming and going at
intervals; not continuous
in • ter • po • si • tion (in tər pə zi´shən) n., interruption; interjection
in • tri • cate (in´tri kət) adj., having many complexly interrelating
parts or elements
in • vin • ci • ble (in vin(t)´sə bəl) adj., incapable of being conquered,
overcome, or subdued
in • vul • ner • a • bil • I • ty (in vəl nə rə bi´lə te￣) n., quality of being
immune to attack
iron • i • cal (_￣ rə´ni kəl) adj., incompatibility between the actual
result of a sequence of events and the normal or expected result
jab • ber (ja´bər) vi., talk rapidly, indistinctly, or unintelligibly
jaded (ja￣d´əd) adj., fatigued by overwork; exhausted
jaun • ty (jôn´te￣) adj., lively in manner or appearance
jo • vial (jo￣´ve￣ əl) adj., good-humored; merry
lad • ened (la￣d´end) vt., heavily loaded
lag (lag) vi., stay or fall behind
lam • en • ta • tion (la mən ta￣´shən) n., act or instance of mourning,
grieving, sobbing
lan • guid (laŋ´gwəd) adj., drooping or flagging from or as if from
exhaustion; weak
lan • guor (laŋ´gər) n., weakness or weariness of body or mind
GLOSSARY 171
lau • rel (lôr´əl) n., crown of laurel, or the leaves of a plant; honor
lav • ish (la´vish) adj., spending or giving generously
lead • en (le´d_n) adj., of the color of lead, or dull gray; heavy
leer (le￣r) vi., glance at sidelong
li • a • ble (l_￣´bəl) adj., exposed or subject to some usually
adverse possibility or action
light (l_￣t) adj., of little importance
liv • id (li´vəd) adj., very angry; enraged; ashen, pale
loi • ter (lôi´tər) vi., remain in an area for no obvious reason
loon (lo—_on) n., lout, idler, simpleton
low • er • ing • ly (lou´ər iŋ le￣) adv., in a dark and threatening
manner
lu • cid (lo—_o´səd) adj., clear to the understanding
lu • di • crous (lo—_o´də krəs) adj., amusing or laughable through
obvious absurdity, incongruity, exaggeration, or eccentricity
lu • gu • bri • ous (lu go—_o´bre￣ əs) adj., exaggeratedly or affectedly
mournful or sad
lull (ləl) n., temporary pause or decline in activity
lu • rid (lur´əd) adj., shining with the red glow of fire seen
through smoke or cloud; wan and ghastly pale in appearance
lus • ter (lus´tər) n., glow of reflected light
mal • e • dic • tion (ma lə dik´shən) n., curse
ma • ni • a • cal (mə n_￣´ə kəl) adj., characterized by uncontrollable
excitement or frenzy
ma • nip • u • late (mə ni´pyo—_o la￣t) vt., control or play upon by
artful or unfair means especially to one’s own advantage
mar • shal (mär´shəl) vt., place in proper rank or position
me • lee (ma￣´la￣) n., confused struggle; hand-to-hand fight among
several people
men • ace (me´nəs) n., show of intention to inflict harm; threat,
danger
men • ac • ing (me´nəs iŋ) adj., threatening harm
mere (me￣r) adj., being nothing more than
me • thod • i • cal (mə thə´di kəl) adj., habitually proceeding
according to order
mire (m_￣r) n., spongy earth (as of a bog or marsh)
172 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
mis • giv • ing (mis gi´viŋ) n., feeling of doubt or suspicion especially
concerning a future event
mono • logue (mon´ə lo_) n., long speech monopolizing conversation
mo • not • o • nous (mə nä´t_n əs) adj., tediously uniform or
unvarying
mo • rose (mə ro￣s´) adj., marked by or expressive of gloom
mor • sel (môr´səl) n., small piece of food; bite
mor • ti • fi • ca • tion (môr tə fə ka￣´shən) n., sense of humiliation
and shame caused by something that wounds one’s pride or
self-respect
mud • dle (mə´d_l) n., confused mess
muse (myo—_oz) vi., become absorbed in thought; turn something
over in the mind meditatively; become absorbed in thought
mus • ter (məs´tər) vt., cause to gather
nip (nip) vt., pinch, bite
non • cha • lant (nôn shə lənt´) adj., having an air of easy unconcern
or indifference
ob • du • rate (əb´də rət) adj., stubbornly persistent in wrongdoing
o • blique (o￣ ble￣k´) adj., neither perpendicular nor parallel
o • blit • er • ate (ô bli´tə ra￣t) vt., remove from existence
o • bliv • i • ous (ə bli´ve￣ əs) adj., lacking active conscious knowledge
or awareness
om • i • nous (ô´mə nəs) adj., foreboding or foreshadowing
something, usually evil
om • i • nous • ly (ə´mə nəs le￣) adv., in a manner that threatens
evil
on • slaught (on´slot) n., especially fierce attack
o • ra • tion (ô ra´shən) n., elaborate, formal, and dignified
speech
or • a • tor • i • cal (ôr ə tôr´i kəl) adj., relating to, or characteristic
of, a public speaker or speeches
orb (ôrb) n., eye
o • ver • ture (o￣ və(r)´chur) n., orchestral introduction to a musical
dramatic work
pa • cif • ic (pə si´fik) adj., tending to lessen conflict; peaceable
GLOSSARY 173
pae • an (pe￣´ən) n., joyous song or hymn of praise, tribute,
thanksgiving, or triumph
pa • gan (pa￣´gən) n., follower of a religion that worships more
than one god
pal • lor (pa´lər) n., deficiency of color especially of the face
parched (pärcht) adj., deprived of natural moisture; thirsty
par • ox • ysm (par´ək si zəm) n., fit, attack, or sudden increase or
recurrence of symptoms
pas • sive • ly (pa´siv le￣) adv., in a manner that lacks energy or
will
pa • thos (pa￣´thôs) n., element in experience or in artistic representation
evoking pity or compassion
pa • tron • iz • ing (pa￣´trə n_￣z iŋ) adj., treating haughtily or
coolly
peal (pe￣l) vt., chime, ring out
pee • vish (pe￣´vish) adj., marked by ill-temper
pelt • ing (pelt´iŋ) n., succession of blows or missiles
per • am • bu • late (pər am´byo—_o la￣t) vt., travel on foot; stroll
per • chance (pər chan(t)s´) adv., perhaps, possibly
per • func • to • ri • ly (pər fəŋ(k)´tə rə le￣) adv., without interest
or enthusiasm
per • func • to • ry (pər fəŋ(k) tə re￣) adj., characterized by routine
or superficiality; mechanical
per • il • ous (per´ə ləs) adj., dangerous
pert (pərt) adj., rudely free and forward
per • tur • ba • tion (pər tər ba￣´shən) n., disturbance, uneasiness
pes • ti • len • tial (pes tə len(t)´shəl) adj., deadly
pet • u • lant • ly (pe´chə lənt le￣) adv., characterized by temporary
ill humor
phi • lip • pic (fə li´pik) n., discourse or declamation full of bitter
condemnation; tirade
pic • tur • esque (pik chə resk´) adj., resembling a picture; charming
or quaint in appearance
pil • fer (pil´fər) vt., steal
plain • tive • ly (pla￣n´tiv le￣) adv., in a manner expressing woe or
suffering
174 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
poi • gnant (pôi´nyənt) adj., designed to make an impression
pomp • ous (pəm´pəs) adj., having or exhibiting self-importance;
arrogant
pomp • ous • ly (päm´pəs le￣) adv., arrogantly; in a self-important
manner
por • tal (po￣r´təl,) n., door, entrance
por • ten • tous (pôr ten´təs) adj., grave or serious
pos • ture (pôs´chər) n., position or bearing of the body
preg • nant (preg´nənt) adj., full, teeming
pre • sume (pri zo—_om_) vt., expect or assume especially with confidence
prime (pr_￣m) vt., instruct beforehand; coach
probe (pro￣b) vt., search into and explore with great thoroughness
pro • ces • sion (prə se´shən) n., group of individuals moving
along in an orderly often ceremonial way
prod • i • gal (prə´di gəl) adj., recklessly extravagant
pro • di • gious (prə di´jəs) adj., exciting amazement or wonder
pro • found (prə faund´) adj., coming from, reaching to, or situated
at a depth; having intellectual depth and insight
pro • fuse (prə fyo—_os_) adj., exhibiting great abundance
prom • i • nence (prô´mə nən(t)s) n., quality, state, or fact of
being noticeable or conspicuous; greatness, distinction, importance
prom • i • nent (prô´mə nənt) adj., readily noticeable
pro • phet • ic (prə fe´tik) adj., foretelling events; predictive
pros • pect (prə´spekt) n., place that commands an extensive
view; mental picture of something to come
pro • spec • tive (prə spek´tiv) adj., likely to come about;
expected
pros • trate (prô´stra￣t) adj., completely overcome and lacking
vitality, will, or power to rise; vt., put in a humble and submissive
posture or state
prov • ince (pro´vints) n., proper or appropriate function or
scope; department of knowledge or activity
prow • ess (prau´əs) n., distinguished bravery; especially military
valor and skill
prox • im • i • ty (prək si´mə te￣) n., closeness
GLOSSARY 175
pulp (pulp) n., soft mass of vegetable matter
purl (pərl) vi., eddy, swirl
quail (kwa￣(ə)l) vi., draw back in dread or terror; cower
qua • ver • ing (kwa￣´və riŋ) adj., trembling
quer • u • lous (kwer´yo—_o ləs) adj., habitually complaining; whining
rail (ra￣l) vi., scold in harsh, insolent, or abusive language
ral • ly (ra´le￣) vt., arouse for action; rouse from depression or
weakness
ral • ly • ing (ra´le￣ iŋ) adj., arousing for action
re • con • noi • ter (re￣ kə nôi´tər) vi., engage in observation or
inspection
re • doubt • able (ri dau´tə bəl) adj., illustrious; worthy of respect;
causing fear or alarm
reel (re￣l) vi., waver; walk or move unsteadily
re • it • er • ate (re￣ i´tər a￣t) vt., state or do over again or repeatedly
sometimes with wearying effect
re • li • ance (ri l_￣´ən(t)s) n., confidence
re • lin • quish (ri liŋ´kwish) vt., give up
re • mon • strance (ri mən(t)´strən(t)s) n., earnest presentation of
reasons for opposition or protest
ren • dez • vous (rən´di vo—_o) n., place appointed for assembling
or meeting
rent (rent) n., rip, tear
re • pose (ri po￣z´) n., state of resting after activity or strain
re • proach (ri pro￣ch´) n., expression of blame or disapproval
re • proof (ri pro—_of) n., criticism for a fault
re • spite (res´pət) n., period of rest or relief
re • splen • dent (ri splen´dənt) adj., shining brilliantly; characterized
by a glowing splendor
res • tive (res´tiv) adj., stubbornly resisting control
re • sume (ri zo—_om´) vt., return to or begin again after interruption
ret • ri • bu • tion (re trə byo—_o´shən) n., dispensing or receiving
of reward or punishment
rev • e • la • tion (re və la´shən) n., act of revealing or communi-
176 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
cating divine truth
re • ver • ber • a • tion (ri vər bə ra￣´shən) n., act of echoing or
resounding
rev • er • ie (re´və re￣) n., daydream
rid • dled (rid´ləd) adj., pierced with many holes
ri • ot • ous (r_￣´ə təs) adj., violent, disorderly
ri • vet (ri´vət) vt., fasten firmly
ro • bust (ro￣ bəst´) adj., having or showing power, strength, or
firmness; healthy
rue • ful • ly (ro—_o´fə le￣) adv., mournfully, regretfully
sa • ga • cious (sə ga￣´shəs) adj., of keen and farsighted penetration
and judgment
salve (sav) n., healing or soothing influence or instrument
sar • don • ic (sär də´nik) adj., disdainfully or skeptically humorous
scoff (skôf) vt., show contempt; mock
scrim • mage (skri´mij) n., minor battle; confused fight
scru • ti • nize (skro—_o´t_n ￣_ z) vt., examine closely and minutely
scru • ti • ny (skro—_o´tə ne￣) n., searching study, inquiry, or inspection
sec • u • lar (se´kyə lər) adj., not overtly or specifically religious
seeth • ing (se￣th´iŋ) adj., be in a state of rapid agitated movement
sem • blance (sem´blən(t)s) n., outward appearance or show
sham (sham) n., cheap falseness
shirk (sh_rk) vi., evade the performance of an obligation
si • dle (s_￣´d_l) vi., go or move with one side foremost, especially
in a furtive advance
sin • is • ter (si´nəs tər) adj., accompanied by or leading to disaster
sin • u • ous (sin´yə wəs) adj., of a snakelike or wavy form
slink (sliŋk) vi., move stealthily or furtively (as in fear or shame)
so • ber (so￣´bər) adj., subdued in tone or color
souse (sous) vt., plunge in liquid; immerse
spare (spa￣r) adj., healthily lean
spas • mod • ic (spaz mô´dik) adj., affected or characterized by
GLOSSARY 177
involuntary muscular contractions
spec • ter (spek´tər) n., ghost; something that haunts or perturbs
the mind
sprint • er (sprint´ər) n., person who runs a fast race for a short
distance
sten • to • ri • an (sten to￣r´e￣ ən) adj., extremely loud
sto • ic (sto￣´ik) n., one apparently or professedly indifferent to
pleasure or pain
stol • id (stô´ləd) adj., having or expressing little or no sensibility;
unemotional
stout • ly (stout´le￣) adv., bravely, boldly
stow (sto￣) vt., put away for future use; store
stu • pen • dous (stu pen´dəs) adj., causing astonishment or
wonder
stu • por (sto—_o´pər) n., state of extreme dullness or inactivity
resulting often from stress or shock
sub • dued (səb do—_od´) adj., lacking in vitality, intensity, or
strength
sub • ject (səb jekt´) vt., bring under control or dominion
sub • lime (sə bl_￣m´) adj., lofty, grand, or exalted in thought,
expression, or manner
suc • cor (sə´kər) n., relief, help, aid
suf • fuse (sə fyo—_oz´) vt., spread over or through in the manner of
fluid or light
sul • len (sə´lən) adj., gloomily or resentfully silent or repressed
sul • try (səl´tre￣) adj., hot with passion or anger
surge (sərj) n., swelling, rolling, or sweeping forward like that of a
wave
sur • ly (sər´le￣) adj., menacing or threatening in appearance
sur • mount (sər maunt´) vt., stand or lie at the top of
swash • buck • ler (swəsh´bə klər) n., daring soldier or adventurer
tab • leau (ta´blo￣) n., graphic description or representation; picture
tan • ta • lize (tan´t_l _￣z) vt., tease or torment
te • mer • i • ty (tə mer´ə te￣) n., unreasonable or foolhardy contempt
of danger or opposition
178 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
tem • pest (tem´pəst) n., violent storm
thor • ough • fare (thər´o￣ far) n., way or place for passage
throe (thro￣) n., pang, spasm
throng (thrôŋ) n., large number of assembled persons; crowd
together in great numbers
tid • ing (t_￣´diŋ) n., piece of news
tot • ter • ing (tô´tər iŋ) adj., being in an unstable condition
tou • sled (tau´zəld) adj., disheveled; rumpled
tran • quil (traŋ´kwəl) adj., free from agitation of mind or spirit
treach • ery (tre´chə re￣) n., violation of allegiance or of faith and
confidence; treason
trep • i • da • tion (tre pə da￣´shən) n., fearful uncertain agitation
trough (trôf) n., conduit, drain, or channel for water
trudge (trəj) vi., walk or march steadily on
trun • dle (trən´d_l) vt., roll; transport in or as if in a wheeled vehicle
tur • bu • lent (tər´byo—_o lənt) adj., causing unrest, violence, or
disturbance
un • daunt • ed (ən dôn´təd) adj., courageous and determined
in the face of danger or difficulty
un • fal • ter • ing (ən fôl´tə riŋ) adj., firm; not weakening
un • gain • ly (ən ga￣n´le￣) adj., clumsy, awkward
un • scathed (ən ska￣thd´) adj., wholly unharmed; not injured
un • scru • pu • lous (un skro—_o´pyə ləs) adj., unethical, dishonest
ut • ter (ə´tər) adj., carried to the utmost point or highest degree;
total
val • iant (val´yənt) adj., possessing or acting with bravery or
boldness; courageous
van • i • ty (va nə´te￣) n., something that is vain, empty, or valueless
veil (va￣(ə)l) vt., cover, provide, obscure, or conceal with or as if
with a veil
vex • a • tion (vek sa￣´shən) n., irritation
vi • and (v_￣´ənd) n., item of food, especially a choice or tasty dish
vig • i • lance (vi´jə lən(t)s) n., quality or state of being alertly
watchful, especially to avoid danger
GLOSSARY 179
vin • di • ca • tion (vin də ka￣´shən) n., justification against denial
or censure
vis • age (vi´zij) n., face, countenance, or appearance of a person
vi • tal • ly (v_￣´t_l e￣) adv., in a manner that is destructive to life;
mortally; fatally
vo • cif • er • ous (vo￣ si´fər us) adj., noisy, loud
wal • low (wô´lo￣) vi., roll oneself about in an lazy or clumsy manner
wane (wa￣n) vi., decrease in size, extent, or degree
well (wel) vi., rise like a flood of liquid
wend (wend) vi., travel
wheel (we￣l) vt., cause to change direction as in a circle
with • al (wi thôl´) adv., together with this; besides
wood • en • ly (wu´d_n le￣) adv., in an awkwardly stiff manner
wrath (rath) n., strong vengeful anger
180 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
Handbook of Literary Terms
Character. A character is a person or animal who takes
part in the action of a literary work. The main character is
called the protagonist. A character who struggles against
the main character is called an antagonist. Characters can
also be classified as major characters or minor characters.
Major characters are ones who play important roles in a
work. Minor characters are ones who play less important
roles. A one-dimensional character, flat character, or caricature
is one who exhibits a single quality, or character trait.
A three-dimensional, full, or rounded character is one who
seems to have all the complexities of an actual human
being.
Characterization. Characterization is the act of creating or
describing a character. Writers use three major techniques to
create a character: direct description, portraying the character’s
behavior, and presenting the thoughts and emotions of
the character. Direct description allows the reader to learn
about such matters as the character’s appearance, habits,
dress, background, personality, and motivations through
the comments of a speaker, a narrator, or another character.
The writer might present the actions and speech of the character,
allowing the reader to draw his or her own conclusions
from what the character says or does. The writer might also
reveal the character’s private thoughts and emotions. See
character.
Cliché. A cliché is an overused expression such as happy as
a lark or time is money. Most clichés begin as vivid, colorful
expressions but become uninteresting because of overuse.
Conflict. A conflict is a struggle between two people or
things in a literary work. A plot is formed around conflict. A
conflict can be internal or external. A struggle that takes
place between a character and some outside force such as
another character, society, or nature is called an external conflict.
A struggle that takes place within a character is called an
internal conflict.
Crisis. The crisis, or turning point, is the point in a plot
when something happens to determine the future course of
events and the eventual fate of the main character.
HANDBOOK OF LITERARY TERMS 181
Description. A description gives a picture in words of a
character, object, or scene. Descriptions make use of sensory
details—words and phrases that describe how things look,
sound, smell, taste, or feel.
Foreshadowing. Foreshadowing is the act of hinting at
events that will happen later in a poem, story, or play.
Irony. Irony is a difference between appearance and reality.
Metaphor. A metaphor is a figure of speech in which one
thing is spoken or written about as if it were another. This
figure of speech invites the reader to make a comparison
between the two things.
Narrator. A narrator is a person or character who tells a
story. Works of fiction almost always have a narrator. The
narrator in a work of fiction may be a major or minor character
or simply someone who witnessed or heard about the
events being related.
Plot. The parts of a plot are as follows: The exposition is the
part of a plot that provides background information about
the characters, setting, or conflict. The inciting incident is the
event that introduces the central conflict. The rising action,
or complication, develops the conflict to a high point of
intensity. The climax is the high point of interest or suspense
in the story. The falling action is all the events that follow the
climax. The resolution is the point at which the central conflict
is ended, or resolved. The dénouement is any material
that follows the resolution and that ties up loose ends.
Point of view. Point of view is the vantage point from
which a story is told. If a story is told from the first-person
point of view, the narrator uses the pronouns I and we and is
a part of or a witness to the action. When a story is told from
a third-person point of view, the narrator is outside the
action; uses words such as he, she, it, and they; and avoids the
use of I and we. In some stories, the narrator’s point of view
is limited. In such stories the narrator can reveal his or her
own private, internal thoughts or those of a single character.
In other stories, the narrator’s point of view is omniscient, or
all-knowing, meaning that the narrator can reveal the private,
internal thoughts of any character.
Protagonist. A protagonist is the main character in a story.
The protagonist faces a struggle or conflict.
Realism. Realism is the attempt to present in art or literature
an accurate picture of reality.
182 THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE
Suspense. Suspense is a feeling of anxiousness or curiosity.
Writers create suspense by raising questions in the reader’s
mind and by using details that create strong emotions.
Symbol. A symbol is a thing that stands for or represents
both itself and something else. Some traditional symbols
include doves for peace; the color green for jealousy; the
color purple for royalty; winter, evening, or night for old age;
roses for beauty; roads or paths for the journey through life;
and owls for wisdom.
HANDBOOK OF LITERARY TERMS 183

