50340

SHARON CREECH 

WINNER OF THE NEWBERY MEDAL 

A Face at the Window 

Gramps says that I am a country girl at heart, and that is true. I have lived 
most of my thirteen years in Bybanks, Kentucky, which is not much more 
than a caboodle of houses roosting in a green spot alongside the Ohio River. 
Just over a year ago, my father plucked me up like a weed and took me and 
all our belongings (no, that is not true - he did not bring the chestnut tree or 
the willow or the maple or the hayloft or the swimming hole or any of those 
things which belong to me) and we drove three hundred miles straight north 
and stopped in front of a house in Euclid, Ohio. 

'Where are the trees?' I said. 'This is where we're going to live?' 

'No,' my father said. 'This is Margaret's house.' 

The front door of the house opened, and Margaret, the lady with the wild 
red hair, stood there. I looked up and down the street. The buildings were all 
jammed together like a row of birdhouses In front of each one was a tiny 
square of grass, and in front of that was a long, long cement sidewalk 
running alongside the cement road. 

'Where's the barn?' I asked. 'Where's the river? Where's the swimming 
hole?’ 

'Oh, Sal,' my father said. 'Come along. There's Margaret.' He waved to the 
lady at the door. 

'We have to go back.' I said 'I forgot something. 

The lady with the wild red hair opened the door and came out on the 
porch. 


'In the back of my closet.' I said, 'under the floorboards. I put something 
there, and I’ve got to have it. 

’Don't be a goose,’ he said. 'Come and see Margaret. 

I did not want to see Margaret. I stood there, looking around, and that’s 
when I saw the face pressed up against an upstairs window next door. It was 
a girl’s round face, and it looked afraid. I didn't know it then, but that face 
belonged to Phoebe Winterbottom, the girl who had a powerful imagination, 
who would become my friend, and who would have all those peculiar things 
happen to her. 

Not long ago, when I was locked in a car with my grandparents for six 
days, I told them the story of Phoebe, and when I finished telling them - or 
maybe even as I was telling them - 1 realized that the story of Phoebe was 
like the plaster wall in our old house in Bybanks, Kentucky. 

My father started chipping away at a plaster wall in the living room of our 
house in Bybanks, shortly after my mother left us one April morning. Our 
house was an old farmhouse, which my parents had been restoring, room by 
room. Each night, as he waited to hear from my mother, he chipped away at 
that wall. 

On the night that we got the bad news - that she was not returning - he 
pounded and pounded on that wall with a chisel and a hammer. At two 
o'clock in the morning, he came up to my room. I was not asleep. He led me 
downstairs and showed me what he had found. Hidden behind the wall was a 
brick fireplace. 

The reason that Phoebe's story reminds me of that plaster wail and the 
hidden fireplace is that beneath Phoebe's story was another one. It was about 
me and my own mother. 

2. The Chickabiddy Starts a Story 

It was after all the adventures of Phoebe that my grand- parents came up 
with a plan to drive from Kentucky to Ohio, where they would pick me up, 
and then the three of us would drive two thousand miles west to Lewiston, 


Idaho. This is how J came to be locked in a car with them for nearly a week. 
It was not a trip that I was eager to go on, but it was one I had to take. 


Gramps had said, 'We'll see the whole ding-dong country!’ 

Gram squeezed my cheeks and said, 'This trip will give me a chance to be 
with my favorite chickabiddy again.' I am, by the way, their only 
chickabiddy. 

My father said that Gram couldn't read maps worth a hill of beans and that 
he was grateful that I had agreed to go along and help them find their way. I 
was only thirteen, and although I did have a way with maps, it was not really 
because of that skill that I was going, nor was it to see the 'whole ding-dong 
country' that Gram and Gramps were going. The real reasons were buried 
beneath piles and piles of unsaid things. 

Some of the real reasons were: 

1. Gram and Gramps wanted to see Momma who was resting peacefully in 
Lewiston. Idaho. 

2. Gram and Gramps knew that I wanted to see Momma, but that I was 
afraid to. 

3. Dad wanted to be alone with the red-headed Margaret Cadaver. He had 
already seen Momma and he had not taken me. Also - although this wasn't 
as important - 1 think Dad did not trust Gram and Gramps to behave 
themselves along the way unless they had me with them. Dad said that if 
they tried to go on their own, he would save everyone a lot Of time and 
embarrassment by calling the police and having them arrested before they 
even left the driveway. It might sound a bit extreme for a man to call the 
police on his own tottery old parents but when my grandparents get in a car 
trouble just naturally follows them like a filly trailing behind a mare. 

My grandparents Hiddle are my father's parents, and they are full up to the 
tops of their heads with goodness and sweetness, and mixed in with all that 
goodness and sweetness is a large dash of peculiarity. This combination 
makes them interesting to know, but you can never predict what they will do 
or say. 



Once it was settled that the three of us would go, the journey took on an 
alarming, expanding need to hurry that was like a walloping great 
thundercloud assembling around me. During the week before we left, the 
sound of the wind was hurry, hurry, hurry, and at night even the silent 
darkness whispered rush, rush, rush. I did not think we would ever leave, 
and yet I did not want to leave. I did not really expect to survive the trip. 

But 1 had decided to go and 1 would go, and I had to be there by my 
mother's birthday. This was extremely important. I believed that if there was 
any chance of bringing my mother back home it would happen on her 
birthday. If I had said this aloud to my father or to my grandparents, they 
would have said that I might as well try to catch a fish in the air, so I did not 
say it aloud. But I believed it. Sometimes I am as ornery and stubborn as an 
old donkey. My father says I lean on broken reeds and will get a face full, of 
swamp mud one day. 

When, at last, Gram and Gramps Hiddle and I set out that first day of the 
trip, I clutched seven good-luck charms and prayed for the first thirty 
minutes solid. I prayed that we would not be in an accident (I was terrified 
of cars and buses) and that we would get there by my mother's birthday - 
seven days away - and that we would bring her home. Over and over, I 
prayed the same thing. I prayed to trees This was easier than praying directly 
to God. There was nearly always a tree nearby. 

As we-pulled onto the Ohio Turnpike, which is the flattest, straightest 
piece of road in God's whole creation, Gram interrupted my prayers 
'Salamanca—' 

I should explain right off that my real name is Salamanca Tree Hiddle. 
Salamanca, my parents thought, was the name of the Indian tribe to which 
my great-great grandmother belonged. My parents were mistaken. The name 
of the tribe was Seneca, but since my parents did not discover their error 
until after I was born and they were, by then, used to my name, it remained 
Salamanca. 

My middle name, Tree, comes from your basic tree, a thing of such beauty 
to my mother that she made it part of my name. She wanted to be more 
specific and use Sugar Maple Tree, her very favorite because Sugar Maple is 
part of her own name, but Salamanca Sugar Maple Tree Hiddle sounded a 
bit much. 



My mother used to call me Salamanca, but after she left, only my 
grandparents Hiddle called me Salamanca (when they were not calling me 
chickabiddy). To most other people, I was Sal, and to a few boys who 
thought they were especially amusing, I was Salamander. 

In the car, as we started our long journey to Lewiston, Idaho, my 
grandmother Hiddle said, 'Salamanca, why don't you entertain us?’ 

'What sort of thing did you have in mind?' I hoped they would not expect 
me to do something thumpingly embarrassing, like climb on top of the car 
and sing a little ditty. You can never tell with my grandparents. 

But Gramps said, ’How about a story? Spin us a yam.' 

I certainly do know heaps of stories, but I learned most of them from 
Gramps Gram suggested I tell one about my mother. That, I could not do. I 
had just reached the point where I could stop thinking about her every 
minute of every day. I wasn't ready - or at least I did not think I was ready - 
to talk about her. 

Gramps said, 'Well, then, what about your friends? You got any tales to 
tell about them?’ 

Instantly, Phoebe Winterbottom came to mind. There was certainly a hog's 
bellyful of things to tell about her. 'I could tell you an extensively strange 
story,’ I warned. 

’Oh, good!’ Gram said. ’Delicious!’ And that is how I happened to suspend 
my tree prayers and tell them about Phoebe Winterbottom, her disappearing 
mother, and the lunatic. It is also how I discovered that beneath Phoebe's 
story was another story. 


3. Bravery 

Because I first saw Phoebe on the day my father and I moved to Euclid, I 
began my story of Phoebe with the visit to the red-headed Margaret 
Cadaver's where I also met Mrs.. Partridge, her elderly mother. Margaret 
nearly fell over herself being nice to me. 'What lovely hair,’ she said, and 


'Aren't you sweet!’ I was not sweet that day. I was being particularly ornery. 

I wouldn't sit down and I wouldn't look at Margaret. 

As we were leaving, I overheard Margaret whisper to my father, 'John, 
have you told her yet - how we met?' 

My father looked exceedingly uncomfortable. 'No, he said. 'I tried - but she 
doesn't want to know.’ 

Now that was the truth, absolutely. Who cares? I thought. Who cares how 
he met Margaret Cadaver? 

I was standing on the porch, and I saw Phoebe's face again at the window 
next door. At the time, all I could think of was getting to our new house, 
which I hoped would be miles and miles away, out in the green countryside. 
When at last we left Mrs. Cadaver and Mrs. Partridge, we drove for 
approximately three minutes. Two blocks from Margaret Cadaver's was the 
place where my father and I were now going to live. 

If someone had blindfolded me and spun me around a few times and 
driven me around for an hour and then removed my blindfold, I would have 
thought that I was still in front of Margaret's house. Tiny, squirt trees. Little 
birdhouses in a row - and one of those birdhouses was ours. No swimming 
hole, no bam, no cows, no chickens, no pigs. Instead, a little white house 
with a miniature patch of green grass in front of it. It wasn't enough to keep 
a cow alive for five minutes. 

'Let’s take a tour,' my father said, rather too heartily. 

We walked through the tiny living room into the miniature kitchen and 
upstairs into my father's pint- sized bedroom and on into my pocket-sized 
bedroom and into the wee bathroom. I looked out the upstairs window down 
into the back yard. Half of the tiny yard was a cement patio and the other 
half was another patch of grass, which our imaginary cow would devour in 
two bites. There was a tall wooden fence all around it, and to the left and 
right were other, identical fenced plots. 

We sat on the front steps and waited for the moving van. When it arrived, 
we watched the men cram our Bybanks furniture into our birdhouse. After 



they finished, my dad and inched into the living room, crawling over sofas 
and chairs and tables and boxes, boxes, boxes. 


'Mm,' my father said. 'Mm. It looks as if we tried to squeeze all the animals 
into the chicken coop.’ 

Three days later, I started school and that’s when I saw Phoebe again. She 
was in my class. The students in my new school spoke in quick, sharp bursts 
and dressed in stiff new clothes. The girls all wore their hair in exactly the 
same way: in a shoulder-length 'bob' (that’s what they called it) with a long 
fringe which they repeatedly shook out of their eyes. We once had a horse 
who did that. 

Everybody kept touching my hair. 'Don't you ever cut it?' they said. 'Can 
you sit on it? How do you wash it? Is it naturally black, like that? Do you 
use conditioner?’ I couldn't tell if they liked my hair or if they thought I 
looked like a whang-doodle. 

They all seemed to talk quite a lot, and everyone seemed to have braces on 
their teeth. One girl, Mary Lou Finney, said the most peculiar things, like out 
of the blue she would say, 'Omnipotent!' or 'Beef brain!' I couldn't make any 
sense of it. There were Japanese twins (a brother and sister), who didn't 
speak at all except to say ’Yes, yes,’ and ’Yes, yes.’ There were Megan and 
Christy who jumped up and down like parched peas, moody Beth Ann, and 
pink-cheeked Alex. There was Ben who drew cartoons all day long, and a 
most peculiar teacher named Mr. Birkway. 

And then there was Phoebe Winterbottom. Ben called her 'Free-Bee Ice 
Bottom' and drew a picture of a bumble-bee with an ice cube on its bottom. 
Phoebe tore it up. 

Phoebe was a quiet girl. She stayed mostly by herself and seemed quite 
shy. She had the most pleasant face and huge, enormous sky-blue eyes. 
Around this pleasant round face, her hair curled in short ringlets as yellow as 
a crow's foot. 

During that first week, when my father and I were at Margaret's (we ate 
dinner there three times the first week), I saw Phoebe's face twice more at 
her window in the house next door. Once I waved at Phoebe, but she didn't 
seem to notice, and at school she never mentioned that she had seen me. 



Then, one day, at lunch, she slid into the seat next to me and said. 'Sal, 
you're ever so courageous. You're ever so brave.' 


To tell you the truth, I was surprised. You could have knocked me over 
with a chicken feather. 'Me? I'm not brave,’ I said. 

'You are. You're ever so brave.' 

I was not. I, Salamanca Tree Hiddle, was afraid of lots and lots of things. 
For example, I was terrified of car accidents, death, cancer, brain tumors 
nuclear war, pregnant women, loud noises, strict teachers, elevators, and 
scads of other things But I was not afraid of spiders, snakes and wasps 
Phoebe, and nearly every- one else in my new class did not have much 
fondness for these creatures. 

On the first day of class, when a dignified black spider was investigating 
my desk, I cupped my hands around it, carried it to the open window, and set 
it outside on the ledge. Mary Lou Finney said, 'Alpha and omega, will you 
look at that!' Beth Am. was as white as milk. All around the room, people 
were acting as if I had single-handedly taken on a fire-breathing dragon. 

During that next week, if an innocent spider was crawling toward 
someone's desk, they would all yell, 'Sal, get it!' When a wasp flew in the 
window for a peek around the room, they said, 'Sal, it's a wasp, get it!' And 
once, a tiny green garden snake slithered along the baseboard and everyone 
screamed, "Sal, a snake, oh, Sal, get it!’ 

As I was trying my best to assist these various creatures in finding their 
way out of our classroom and back into the wide open spaces, people would 
say, ’Sal, kill it, kill it!’ I wondered how they would like it if someone 
smooshed them just because they happened to stray into someone else’s 
room. 

I suppose that just because I was not afraid of these little creatures, people 
thought I was brave. I suppose they didn't know how I felt about cars, 
cancer, nuclear war and all those other things. What I have since realized is 
that if people expect you to be brave, sometimes you pretend that you are, 
even when you are frightened down to your very bones. But this was later, 
during the whole thing with Phoebe's lunatic, that I realized this. 



At this point in my story, Gram interrupted me to say, 'Why, Salamanca, of 
course you're brave. All the Hiddles are brave. It's a family trait. Look at 
your daddy - your momma-' 

'My momma is not a real Hiddle,’ I said. 

'She practically is,' Gram said. 'You can't be married to a Hiddle that long 
and not become a Hiddle.' That is not what my mother used to say. She 
would tell my father, 'You Hiddles are a mystery to me. I'll never be a true 
Hiddle.' She did not say this proudly. She said it as if she were thumpingly 
sorry about it, as if it was some sort of failing in her, some sort of loss 

My mother's parents - my other set of grandparents - are Pickfords, and 
they are as unlike my grand- parents Hiddle as a donkey is unlike a pickle. 
Grand- mother and Grandfather Pickford stand straight up, as if sturdy, steel 
poles run down their backs. They wear starched, ironed clothing, and when 
they are shocked or surprised (which is often), they say, 'Really? Is that so?’ 
and their eyes open widely and their mouths turn down at the corners. 

Once I asked my mother why Grandmother and Grandfather Pickford 
never laughed. My mother said, 'They're just so busy being respectable. It 
takes a lot of concentration to be that respectable.’ and then m~ mother 
laughed and laughed, in a friendly, gentle way, and her own spine was not 
made of steel, you could tell, because she bent in half, laughing and 
laughing. 

My mother said that Grandmother Pickford's one single act of defiance in 
her life as a Pickford was in naming my mother. Grandmother Pickford, 
whose own name is Gayfeather, named my mother Chanhassen. It's an 
Indian name, meaning 'tree sweet juice’, or - in other words - maple sugar. 
Only Grandmother Pickford ever called my mother by her Indian name, 
though. Everyone else called my mother 'Sugar'. 

Most of the time, my mother seemed nothing like her parents at all, and it 
was hard for me to imagine that she had come from them. Only occasionally 
- very, very, rarely - in small, unexpected moments, the corners of my 
mother's mouth would turn down and she'd say, 'Really? Is that so?' and she 
sounded exactly like a Pickford. 



4. That's What I'm Telling You 


On the day that Phoebe sat next to me at lunch and told me I was 'ever so 
brave', she invited me to her house for dinner-that night. 

’Sure,' I said. To be honest, I was relieved that I would not have to eat at 
Margaret's again. I did not want to see Dad and Margaret smiling at each 
other. I knew that Margaret and her elderly mother, Mrs. Partridge, were 
trying their best to make me feel welcome, but they were a bit odd, and I 
was feeling sad and ornery all the time. 

I wanted everything to be like it was. I wanted to be back in Bybanks 
Kentucky, in the hills and the trees, near the cows and chickens and pigs I 
wanted to run down the hill from the barn and through the kitchen door that 
banged behind me, and see my mother and my father sitting at the table 
peeling apples. 

Phoebe and I walked home from school together. We stopped briefly at my 
house so that I could call my father at work. Margaret had helped him find a 
job selling farm machinery. When I phoned him that day, he said it made 
him happy as a clam at high water to know I had a new friend. Maybe this is 
really why he was happy, I thought, or maybe it was because he could be 
alone with Margaret Cadaver. 

Phoebe and I then walked to her house. As we passed Margaret Cadaver's 
house, a voice called out 'Sal? Sal? Is that you’!’ 

Phoebe put her hand up to her mouth and said. 'Oh!' 

In the shadows on the porch. Margaret's mother. Mrs. Partridge, sat in a 
wicker rocker. A thick, gnarled cane with a handle carved in the shape of a 
cobra's head lay across her knees Her purple dress had slipped up over her 
bony knees, which were spread apart, and, I hate to say it, you could see 
right up her skirt. Around her neck was a yellow feather scarf ('My boa’ she 
once told me, ’my most favouritest boa’). 

As I started up the walk, Phoebe pulled on my arm. 'Don't go up there,’ she 
said. 

’It’s only Mrs. Partridge,’ I said. 'Come on.’ 


'Who's that with you?' Mrs. Partridge said. 'What's that on her face?' I 
knew what she was going to do. She did this with me the first time I met her. 

Phoebe placed her hands on her own round face and felt about. 'Is it beans? 
Is it the beans from that red bean salad I had at lunch?' 

'Come here,' Mrs. Partridge said. She wriggled her crooked little fingers at 
Phoebe. 

Phoebe looked at me, and I pushed her a little closer. Mrs. Partridge put 
her fingers up to Phoebe's face and mashed around gently over her eyelids 
and down her cheeks. Then she said, 'Just as I thought. It's two eyes, a nose 
and a mouth.' Then she laughed a wicked laugh that sounded as if it was 
bouncing off jagged rocks. 'You're thirteen years old.' 

'Yes' Phoebe said. 

'I knew it,' Mrs. Partridge said. 'I just knew it.' She patted her yellow 
feather boa. 

'This is Phoebe Winterbottom,' I said. 'She lives right next door to you. 

When we left, Phoebe whispered, 'I wish you hadn't done that. I wish you 
hadn't told her I lived next door. 

'Why not? You don't seem to know Mrs. Cadaver and Mrs. Partridge very 
well-' 


'They haven't lived there very long. Only a month or so.' 

'Don't you think it's remarkable that she guessed your age like that?' 

'I don't see what is so remarkable about it,' Phoebe said. Before I could 
explain, she started telling me about the time that she and her mother, father 
and sister Prudence, had gone to the State Fair. They went to a booth where 
a crowd was gathered around a tall, thin man. 


'So, what was he doing?' I asked. 



'That's what I'm telling you,' Phoebe said. Phoebe had a way of sounding 
like a grown-up sometimes. When she said, 'That's what I'm telling you,' she 
sounded like a grown-up talking to a child. 'All around, people were saying, 
"Oh!" and "Amazing!" and "How does he do that?" What he was doing was 
guessing people's ages He had to guess your correct age within one year or 
else you won a teddy bear. 

'How did he do it?' I asked. 

'That's what I'm telling you,' Phoebe said. 'The thin man would look 
someone over carefully, close his eyes, and then he would point his finger at 
the person and shout, "Seventy-two!" ' 

'At everyone? He guessed everyone to be seventy- two?' 

'Sal,' she said. 'That's what I am trying to tell you. I was just giving an 
example. He might have said, "ten" or "thirty" or "seventy-two". It just 
depended on the person. He was astounding. 

I really thought it was more astounding that Mrs. Partridge could do this, 
but I didn't say anything. 

Phoebe said that her father wanted the thin man to guess his age. 'My 
father thinks he looks very young for his age, and he was certain he could 
fool the man. After studying my father closely, the thin man closed his eyes, 
pointed his finger at my father and shouted. "Fifty-two!" My father gave a 
little cry of astonishment, and all around people were automatically 
beginning to say "Oh!" and "Amazing" and all that. But my father stopped 
them. 

'Why did he do that?' 

Phoebe started pulling on one of her yellow curls I think she was wishing 
she hadn't started this story in the first place. 'Because he wasn't anywhere 
near fifty- two. He was only thirty-eight.' 


'Oh,' I said. 



'And all day long, my father followed us through the fair, carrying his 
prize, a large, green teddy bear. He was miserable. He kept saying, "Fifty- 
two? Fifty-two? Do I look fifty-two?" ’ 

'Does he?’ I said. 

Phoebe pulled harder on her hair. 'No, he does not look fifty-two. He looks 
thirty-eight.' She was very defensive about her father. 

Phoebe's mother was in the kitchen baking pies On the counter were two 
cartons of blackberries I couldn't keep my eyes off the blackberries. Mrs. 
Winterbottom said, ’I'm making blackberry pie. I hope you like black- 
berries - is there something wrong? Really, if you don't like blackberries, I 
could-’ 

'No,' I said. 'I like blackberries very much. I just have some allergies, I 
think.’ 

'To blackberries'" Mrs. Winterbottom said, 

'Oh, no. not to blackberries.' The truth is, I do not have allergies, but I 
could not admit that the sight of blackberries reminded me of my mother. 

Mrs. Winterbottom made me and Phoebe sit down at the kitchen table and 
tell her about our day. She brought out a plate of homemade cookies. Phoebe 
told her about Mrs. Partridge guessing her age. 

'She's really remarkable,’ I said. 

Phoebe said, 'It's not that remarkable, Sal. I wouldn't exactly use the word 
"remarkable". 

'But, Phoebe,’ I said, 'Mrs. Partridge is blind.’ 

Both Phoebe and her mother said, ’Blind?’ 

Later, Phoebe said to me, 'Don't you think it’s odd' that Mrs. Partridge, 
who is blind, could see something about me - but I, who can see, was blind 
about her? And speaking of odd, there’s something very odd about that Mrs. 
Cadaver. 



'Margaret?' I said. 


'Is that her name? Margaret Cadaver? Mrs. Margaret Cadaver?' 

'Yes' 

'She scares me half to death,' Phoebe said. 

'Why?' 

'That's what I'm telling you,' she said. 'First, there is that name: Cadaver. 
You know what Cadaver means?' 

Actually, I did not. 

'It means dead body.' 

'Are you sure?' I said. 

'Of course I am sure, Sal. You can check the dictionary if you want. Do 
you know what she does for a living - what her job is?' 

'Yes.' I was pleased to say. I was pleased to know something. 'She's a 
nurse. 

'Exactly.' Phoebe said. 'Would you want a nurse whose name meant dead 
body? And that hair. Don't you think all that sticking-out red hair is spooky? 
And that voice. It reminds me of dead leaves all blowing around on the 
ground.' 

This was Phoebe's power. In her world, no one was ordinary. People were 
either perfect - like her father - or, more often, they were weird lunatics or 
axe murderers She could convince me of just about any- thing - especially 
about Margaret Cadaver. From that day on, Margaret Cadaver's hair did look 
spooky and her voice did sound exactly like dead leaves. Somehow it was 
easier to deal with Margaret if there were reasons not to like her, and I 
definitely did not want to like her. 



'Do you want to know an absolute secret?' Phoebe said. (I did.) 'Promise 
not to tell.' (I promised.) 'Maybe I shouldn't,' she said. 'Your father goes over 
there all the time. Your father likes her, doesn't he?' 

'Yes Probably. Maybe.' 

'I won't say, then.' She twirled her finger through her curly hair and let 
those big blue eyes roam over the ceiling. 'Her name is Mrs. Cadaver, right? 
Have you ever wondered what happened to Mr. Cadaver?' 

'I never really thought about—' 'Well, I think I know.' Phoebe said. 'And it 
is awful, purely awful.' 


5. Damsel in Distress 

At this point in my story about Phoebe, Gram said, 'I knew somebody like 
Peeby once.' 

'Phoebe,' I said. 

'Yes, that's right. I knew someone just like Peeby, only her name was 
Gloria. Gloria lived in the wildest, most pepped-up world - a scary one, but 
oh! - scads more exciting than my own. 

Gramps said, 'I remember Gloria. She's the one who told you not to many 
me. She's the one who said I would be your ruination.' 

'Shoosh,' Gram said. 'Gloria was right about that at least.' She elbowed 
Gramps. 'Besides, Gloria only said that because she wanted you for herself.' 
'Gol-dang!' Gramps said. He pulled into a rest stop along the Ohio Turnpike. 
He wanted to check the map. 

'I don't think we'll get lost on the Ohio Turnpike,' I said. 'It's one long 
straight road that goes straight across Ohio.' I did not want to stop. Rush, 
rush, rush, said the wind, the sky, the clouds, the trees. Rush, rush, rush. 

'Well, there, chickabiddy, I only want to be sure,' Gramps said. 


If all he wanted to do was check the map, that seemed a safe enough and 
quick enough thing for him to do. My grandparents can get into trouble as 
easy as a fly can land on a watermelon. 

Three years ago when they drove to Florida, they were stopped by the 
police for driving in their underwear. The air conditioning, had 'completely 
fizzled and pooped.' my grandfather explained. They were hot. Two years 
ago when they drove to Washington, D. C., they were arrested for stealing 
the back tyres off a Senator's car. 'We had two flat, sprunkled tyres' my 
grandfather explained. 'We were only borrowing the Senator's tyres. We 
were going to return them.' In Bybanks, Kentucky, you could do this. You 
could borrow someone's back tyres and return them later, but you could not 
do this in Washington, D. C., and you could especially not do this to a 
Senator's car. 

Last year when Gram and Gramps drove to Philadelphia, they were 
stopped by the police, for irresponsible driving. 'You were driving on the 
shoulder,’ a police- man told Gramps Gramps said, ’Shoulder? I thought it 
was an extra lane. Look how smooth it is you don't get nice smooth 
shoulders like this back in Kentucky. ’That’s a mighty fine shoulder. 

So, there we were, just a few hours into our trip out to Lewiston, Idaho, 
and we were safely stopped in a rest area and we were quietly and safely and 
quickly checking the map. Then Gramps noticed the back end of a woman 
leaning over the fender of a car parked next to the water fountain. The 
woman was peering at her engine and dabbing a white handkerchief at 
various greasy items inside. 

'Excuse me,’ Gramps said, gallantly. 'I believe I see a lady in some 
distress,' and off he marched to her rescue. 

Gram sat there patting her knees and singing, 'Oh, meet me, in the tulips, 
when the tulips do bloooom...’ 

The lady's white handkerchief, now spotted with black grease, dangled 
from her fingertips as she smiled down on the back of Gramps, who had 
taken her place leaning over the engine. 

'Might be the car-bust-er-ator,’ he said, ’or maybe not.’ He tapped a few 
hoses. 'Might be these dang snakes,' he said. 



'Oh, my,' the woman said. 'Snakes? In my engine?’ 

Gramps waggled a hose. 'This here is what I call a snake,' he said. 

'Oh, I see,' the woman said. 'And you think it might be those - those 
snakes? That might be the problem?' 

'Maybe so,' Gramps said. He pulled on one and it came loose. 'See there?' 
he said. 'It's off.' 

'Well, yes, but you—' 

'Dang snakes' Gramps said. He pulled at another one. It came loose. 
'Lookee there,' he said. 'Another one.' 

The woman smiled a thin, little, worried smile. 'But- 

Two hours later, there was not a single 'snake' still attached to anything to 
which it was supposed to be attached. The 'car-bust-er-ator' lay dismantled 
on the ground. Various other pieces of the woman's engine were scattered 
here and there. 

The woman was in the phone booth. Gramps was still pulling things out of 
the engine. I was lying in the grass praying to a sugar maple tree and 
listening to its response: rush, hurry, rush. The tree's mapley smell reminded 
me of Bybanks Kentucky. Gram was singing about the tulips. 

We had left home six hours earlier and were now precisely eighty-two 
miles along our two-thousand mile journey. 'Let us get there in time.' I 
prayed, 'and don't let u~ get in an accident, and let my mother come home 
with us.' 

At last, the woman with the dismantled engine called a mechanic, who 
took one look at ah the pieces of her engine lying on the ground and said, 
'You have a credit card?' 

'Yes' she said. 


Gramps pulled out his wallet. 'If you need some cash—' 



'Oh, thank you,’ she said. ’That’s very kind of you, but I’m all set. Thank 
you for - for’ - she looked around at all the pieces of her car - ’for everything. 
I’m sure you have to be on your way. 

And, once Gramps was satisfied that the mechanic was an honest man who 
might actually be able to repair her car, we started on our trip again. 

’Salamanca,’ Gram said, ’tell us more about Peeby.’ 

’Phoebe,’ I said.’ Phoebe Winterbottom.’ 

'Yes, that’s right,’ Gram said. ’Peeby.’ 

6. Blackberries 

'What was the diabolic thing that happened to Mr. Cadaver?’ Gramps 
asked. 'You didn't tell us that yet.' 

I explained that just as Phoebe was going to divulge the purely awful thing 
that had happened to Mr. Cadaver, her father came home from work and we 
all sat down to dinner: me, Phoebe, Mr. and Mrs. Winterbottom, and 
Phoebe’s sister, Prudence. 

Phoebe's parents reminded me a lot of my other grandparents - the 
Pickfords Like the Pickfords, Mr. and Mrs. Winterbottom spoke quietly, in 
short sentences, and sat straight up as they ate their food. They were 
extremely polite to each other, saying ’Yes, Norma,' and ’Yes, George,' and 
'Would you please pass the potatoes, Phoebe?' and ’Wouldn't your guest like 
another helping?' 

They were picky about their food, too. Everything they ate was what my 
father would call 'side dishes': potatoes, courgettes, bean salad, and a 
mystery casserole that I could not identify. They didn’t eat meat, and they 
didn't use butter. They were very much concerned with cholesterol. 

From what I could gather, Mr. Winterbottom worked in an office, creating 
road maps. Mrs. Winterbottom baked and cleaned and did laundry and 
grocery shopping. I had a funny feeling that Mrs. Winterbottom did no 
actually like all this barking and cleaning and laundry and shopping, and I’m 


not quite sure why I had that feeling because if you just listened to the words 
she said, it sounded as if she was Mrs. Supreme Housewife. 

For example, at one point Mrs. Winterbottom said. 'I believe I've made 
more pies in the past week than I can count.’ She said this in a cheery voice, 
but after- wards, in the small silence, when no one commented on all these 
pies she had been busy making, she gave a soft sigh and looked down at her 
plate. 

A little later, she said, 'I couldn't find exactly that brand of muesli you like 
so much, George, but I bought something similar. 

'Oh?' Mr. Winterbottom said. 

'I'm sure it's quite similar to what you wanted.’ 

Mr. Winterbottom kept eating and again, in that silence, Mrs. 
Winterbottom gave a soft sigh and examined her plate. 

I was sort of happy for her when she announced that since Phoebe and 
Prudence were back in school, she thought she would return to work. 
Apparently, during the school terms she worked part-time at Rocky's Rubber 
as a receptionist. I thought this might be a nice change for her, to be out of 
the house, but when she mentioned going back to work and no one said any- 
thing about it, she sighed again and pushed her potatoes to one side of her 
plate. 

A few times, Mrs. Winterbottom called her husband, 'sweetie pie' and 
'honey bun'. She said, 'Would you like more courgettes, sweetie pie?’ and 
'Did I make enough potatoes, honey bun?’ 

For some reason, that surprised me, those little names she used. She was 
dressed in a plain brown skirt and white blouse. On her feet were sensible, 
wide, flat shoes. She did not wear make-up. Even though she had a pleasant, 
round face and long yellow curls, the main impression I got was that she was 
used to being plain and ordinary, that she was not supposed to do anything 
too shocking. 


Another odd impression I got was that Mr. Winterbottom was playing the 
role of a Father, with a capital 'F'. He sat at the head of the table with his 



white shirt cuffs rolled back neatly. He still wore his red and blue striped tie. 
He kept his face very serious throughout the entire meal. His voice was 
deep, and his words were clear. 'Yes, Norma,' he said, deeply and clearly. 
'No, Norma.' He looked more like fifty-two than thirty- eight, but this was 
not something I would ever call to his - or Phoebe's - attention. 

Phoebe's sister Prudence was quite a bit like her mother. Prudence was 
seventeen years old, but she acted like she was almost a mother herself. She 
ate primly, she nodded politely, she smiled a small, polite smile after 
everything she said. 

It all seemed peculiar. They acted so thumpingly tidy and respectable. 

At the end of the dinner, Mrs. Winterbottom brought in the blackberry pie. 
I ate it, even though the black- berries did not have as much flavour as they 
did in Bybanks, Kentucky. Mr. Winterbottom asked Phoebe who was in her 
class at school. She started naming everyone, and when she got to Mary Lou 
Finney, Mr. Winterbottom said, 'Finney? Finney?' He turned to Mrs. 
Winterbottom. 'Norma, is Mr. Finney the one who wears blue jeans? The 
one who is always throwing that football?' 

'Yes George.' 

To Phoebe, he said, 'Is Mary Lou the one who goes around saying 
'Omnipotent!'? 

Phoebe said, 'Yes.' 

Mrs. Winterbottom said, 'I suppose - they probably don't seem - they 
probably appear a bit odd-' 

Mr. Winterbottom said, 'Norma, I wouldn't want to judge.' But he was 
judging, I could tell. He didn't like the Finneys, or maybe he was jealous of 
them. 

Mrs. Winterbottom gave her soft sigh and folded her napkin. I had the 
feeling that there was something she really wanted to say, but she had 
already decided that no one would listen. 



After dinner, Phoebe walked me home, and on the way, she talked about 
Mrs. Cadaver. She said, 'You wouldn't think it to look at her, but Mrs. 
Cadaver is as strong as an ox.’ 

'How do you know that?’ I said. 

Phoebe looked behind her, as if she was expecting someone to be 
following us. 'Because,' she said, 'I have seen her chop down trees and lug 
the remains clear across her back yard. Do you know what I think? I think 
maybe she killed Mr. Cadaver and chopped him up and buried him in the 
back yard.' 

'Phoebe!' I said. 

'Well, I'm just telling you what I think, that’s all.' 

That night, as I lay in bed, I thought about Mrs. Cadaver, and I wanted to 
believe that she was capable of killing her husband and chopping him into 
pieces and burying him in the back yard. 

And then I started thinking about the blackberries, and about how spoiled I 
was by the blackberries in Bybanks, Kentucky. I had a vision of my mother 
and me. walking around the rims of the fields and pastures, picking 
blackberries in the summer, just as we used to. We filled our pockets with 
blackberries, but we did not pick from the bottom of the vine or from the 
top. The ones at the bottom were for the rabbits, my mother said, and the 
ones at the top were for the birds. The ones at people-height were for people. 

Lying in bed, remembering those blackberries, made me think of 
something else too. It was something that happened a couple of years ago, 
on a morning when my mother slept late. It was that time she was pregnant. 
My father and I had already eaten breakfast, and he was out in the fields. On 
the table, my father had left a single flower in each of two juice glasses - a 
black- eyed susan in front of my place, and a white petunia in front of my 
mother's My father must have gone out to the field and picked them as soon 
as he had awakened. 

When my mother came into the kitchen that day, she saw the flowers 
immediately. 'Oh!' she said. 'Glory!' She bent her face toward each flower. 
She looked out the window and said, 'Let’s go find him.' 



We climbed the hill to the bam, crawled between the fence wires and 
crossed the field. My father was standing at the far end of the field, his back 
to us, hands on his hips, looking at a section of fence. 

My mother slowed down when she saw him. I was right behind her. It 
looked as if she wanted to creep up and surprise him, so I was quiet too and 
cautious in my steps. I could hardly keep from giggling. It seemed so daring 
to be sneaking up on my father, and I was sure my mother was going to 
throw her arms around him and kiss him and hug him and tell him how 
much she loved the flower on the kitchen table. My mother has always loved 
anything that normally grows or lives out of doors - anything - lizards, trees, 
cows, caterpillars, birds, flowers, grasshoppers, crickets, toads, dandelions, 
ants pigs. 

Just before we reached my father, he turned around. Maybe he heard 
us.This seemed to surprise my mother and throw her off-guard. She stopped. 

'Sugar—,' he said. 

My mother opened her mouth, and I was thinking, ’Come on ! Throw your 
arms around him! Tell him!’ 

But, before she could speak, my father pointed to the fence and said, 'Look 
at that. A morning's work.’ He indicated a new length of wire strung between 
two new posts. There was sweat on his face and arms 

And then I saw that my mother was crying. My father saw it too. 'What?' 
he said. 

He stepped toward her, and she said, 'Oh, you're too good, John. You're 
too good. All you Hiddles are too good. I'll never be so good. I'll never be 
able to think of all the things - 1 can never do like you do—’ 

My father looked down at me. 


'The flowers,' I said. 



'Oh,' he said. He put his sweaty arms around her, but she was still crying 
and it wasn't what I had imagined it would be. It was all sad instead of 
happy. 

The next morning when I went into the kitchen, my father was standing 
beside the table. He was looking at two small dishes of blackberries - still 
shiny and wet with dew - one dish at his place and one at mine. 

'Thank you,' I said. 

'No, it wasn't me,' he said. 'It was your mother. 

Just then, she came in from the back porch. My father put his arms around 
her and they smooched and it was all tremendously romantic, and I started to 
turn away, but my mother caught my arm. She pulled me to her and said to 
me - though it was meant for my father. I think - 'See? I'm almost as good as 
your father!' She said it in a shy way, laughing a little. I felt betrayed, but I 
didn't know why. 

After that dinner at Phoebe's where we had the blackberry pie, I started 
wondering about all of this. I had been part of my mother - she was me and I 
was her - more than I was part of my father. So anything that was true of her 
was true of me. It was as if she had said, 'We're almost as good as your 
father,' and I wanted to say 'We're as good as - We're better,' but why I 
wanted to say this, I don't know. I love my father. 

It is surprising all the things you remember just by eating a blackberry pie. 

7. Ill-ah-no-way 

'Well, lookee here!' Gramps shouted. 'The Illinois state line!' He 
pronounced Illinois 'Ill-ah-no-way,' exactly the way everyone in Bybanks, 
Kentucky, pronounced it, and hearing that 'Ill-ah-no-way' made me suddenly 
homesick for Bybanks. 

'What happened to Indiana?' Gram said. 

'Why, you gooseberry,' Gramps said. 'That's where we've been the past 
three hours, barrelling through Indiana. You've been listening to the story of 
Peeby and plumb missed Indiana. Don't you remember Elkhart? We ate 


lunch in Elkhart. Don't you remember South Bend? You took a pee in South 
Bend. Why, you missed the entire Hoosier state! You gooseberry. He 
thought this was very funny. 

'You know how it got called the Hoosier state?’ he said. 

'No, I do not,' Gram said. I think she was a little angry that she had missed 
Indiana. 

Gramps said, 'Whenever you go up to a house here in Indiana, the people 
inside call out, "Who's there?" All up and down the state, people are calling 
out, "Who's there? Who’s there?" So they got to be known as "Who’s-there's" 
- Hoosiers - get it, gooseberry?’ 

'Quit calling me a gooseberry.' Gram said. ’Of course. I get it. 

Just then, the road curved (it actually curved - this was quite a shock), and 
there, off to the right was a huge jingbang mass of water. It was as blue as 
the bluebells that grow behind the barn in Bybanks, and that water just went 
on and on - it was all you could see. It looked like a huge shining pasture of 
water. 

'Are we at the ocean?' Gram asked. 'We're not supposed to be passing the 
ocean, are we?’ 

'You gooseberry,' Gramps said. ’That’s Lake Michigan.' Then he kissed his 
finger and put his finger on Gram's cheek. 

'I sure would like to put my feet in that water, Gram said. 

Gramps swerved across two lanes of traffic and onto the exit ramp, and 
faster than you could milk a cow we were standing barefoot in the cool 
water of Lake Michigan. The waves splashed up on our clothes, and the 
seagulls flew in circles overhead, calling in one great chorus, as if they were 
glad to see us 

'Huzza, huzza!' Gram said, as she wriggled her heels into the sand. 'Huzza, 
huzza!' 



Later, we drove just a little further down the road and stopped for the night 
on the outskirts of Chicago. I looked around at what I could see of Ill-ah-no- 
way from the Howard Johnson's Motel, and it might as well have been seven 
thousand miles from the lake. It all looked precisely like northern Ohio to 
me, with its flat land and long, straight cement roads, and I thought what a 
very long journey this was going to be. With the dark came the whispers: 
rush, hurry, rush. 

That night, I lay there trying to imagine Lewiston, Idaho, but my mind 
would not go forward to a place I had never been. Instead, I kept drifting 
back to Bybanks. 

When my mother left for Lewiston, Idaho, that April my first thoughts 
were, 'How could she do that? How could she leave me, when I am part of 
her? How could she function without part of her?' 

As the days went on, many things were harder and sadder, but some things 
were strangely easier. When my mother had been there, I was like a mirror. 
If she was happy. I was happy. If she was sad, I was sad. For the first few 
days after she left, I felt numb, non-feeling. I didn't know how to feel. I 
would find myself looking around for her, to see what I might want to feel. 

One day, about two weeks after she had left, I was standing against the 
fence watching a new-born calf wobble on its thin legs. It tripped and 
wobbled and swung its big head in my direction and gave me a sweet, loving 
look. 'Oh!' I thought. 'I am happy at this moment in time.' I was surprised 
that I knew this all by myself, without my mother there. And that night in 
bed, I did not cry. I said to myself, 'Salamanca Tree Hiddle, you can be 
happy without her.' It seemed a mean thought and I was sorry for it, but it 
felt true. 

In the motel, as I was remembering these things. Gram came and sat on the 
edge of my bed. She said, 'Do you miss your daddy? Do you want to call 
him?' 


I did miss him, and I did want to call him, but I said, 'No, I'm fine, really.' 
He might think I was a goose if I had to call him already. 



'OK, then, chickabiddy,' Gram said, and when she leaned over to kiss me, I 
could smell the baby powder she always used. That smell made me feel sad, 
but I didn't know why. 

The next morning, we got lost leaving Chicago, Illinois, a city of freeways 
that twist all around in a deliberate attempt to get people confused. We went 
in circles for two hours. I prayed and prayed: 'Please don't let us get in an 
accident. Please get us there in time— 

Gramps said. 'At least it's a mighty fine day for a drive.' 

When we finally found a road that seemed to be heading west, we took it. 

It wasn't the one we wanted, but we followed it. We drove halfway across 
II 1-ah-no- way and then found a sign that said, 'Route 90 North, to 
Wisconsin.' We zoomed off the next exit ramp. 'Get me out of Ill-ah-no- 
way,' Gramps said. 

Our plan was to curve across the lower part of Wisconsin, veer into 

Minnesota, and then barrel straight on through Minnesota, South Dakota 
and Wyoming, sweep up into Montana, and cross the Rocky Mountains into 
Idaho. Gramps figured it would take us about a day in each state. He didn't 
intend to stop too much until we reached South Dakota. 

He was really looking forward to South Dakota. 'We're gonna see the 
Badlands,' he said. 'We're gonna see the Black Hills.' 

I didn't like the sound of either of those places, but I knew why we were 
going there. My mother had been there. The bus that she took out to 
Lewiston stopped in all the tourist spots. Now we were following along in 
her footsteps. 


8. The Lunatic 

Once we were well on the road out of ill-ah-no-way, Gram said, 'Go on 
with Peeby. What happened next?' 

'Do you want to hear about the lunatic?' 


'Goodness!' Gram said. 'As long as it’s not too bloody. That Peeby is just 
like Gloria. I swear. A "lunatic". Imagine.' 


Gramps said, 'Did Gloria really have a hankering for me?' 

'Maybe she did, and maybe she didn't,' Gram said. 

'Well, gol-dang, I was only asking—' 

'Seems to me,' Gram said, 'you've got enough to worry about, 
concentrating on these roads, without worrying about Gloria. 

Gramps winked at me in the rear-view mirror. 'I think our gooseberry is 
jealous' he said. 

'I am not,' Gram said. 'Tell about Peeby, chickabiddy.' 

I didn't want Gram and Gramps to get in a fight over Gloria, so I was 
happy to continue telling Phoebe's story. I was at Phoebe's one Saturday 
morning when Mary Lou Finney called and invited us over to her house. 
Phoebe's father was off playing golf, and Phoebe's mother had just left for 
the grocery store. 

Phoebe went all around the house checking to make sure that the doors and 
windows were locked. Her mother had already done this, but she made 
Phoebe promise to do it as well. 'Just in case,' Mrs. Winterbottom had said. I 
was not sure 'just in case' what - maybe in case someone had stuck in and 
opened all the windows and unlocked all the doors in the fifteen minutes 
between the time she left and the time we did. 'You can never be too careful,' 
Mrs. Winterbottom had said. 

The doorbell rang. Phoebe and I looked out the window. Standing on the 
porch was a young man who looked about seventeen or eighteen, although I 
am not as good at guessing people's ages as blind Mrs. Partridge is The 
young man was wearing a black T-shirt and blue jeans, and his hands were 
stuffed into his pockets. He seemed nervous 

'My mother hates it when strangers come to the door,' Phoebe said. 'She is 
convinced that any day one of them will burst into the house and start 
waving a gun around and turn out to be an escaped lunatic.' 



'Oh, honestly, Phoebe,' I said. 'Do you want me to answer the door?’ 

Phoebe took a deep breath. ’We'll do it together. She opened the door and 
said hello in a cool voice to indicate, I think, that she wasn't someone who 
could be fooled easily by strangers. 

'Is this 49 Grey Street?' the young man said. 

Since Phoebe's street had four signs indicating that this was Grey Street, 
and since Phoebe's house had rather large and prominent black numbers (49) 
over the front door, I did not think this was a particularly intelligent 
question. Phoebe admitted that yes, it was 49 Grey Street. 

'So, the Winterbottoms live here?’ he said. Phoebe admitted that yes, it was 
the Winterbottom residence. Then she said, 'Excuse me a moment, please,' 
and closed the door. To me, she said, 'Do you detect any signs of lunacy? 
There does not appear to be any place he could be hiding a gun. His jeans 
are ever so tight and his T-shirt is a bit small. He might, however, have a 
knife tucked into his socks.' 

Phoebe could really be dramatic. 'He isn't wearing any socks' I said. 

Phoebe opened the door again. 

The young man said, 'I want to see Mrs. Winterbottom. Is she here or 
what?' 

'Yes' Phoebe lied. 

The young man looked up and down the street. His hair was curly and 
mussed, and there were bright pink circles on his cheeks. He wouldn't look 
us straight in the eye, but instead kept glancing left and right. 

'I want to talk to her,' he said. 

'To who?' Phoebe said. 


Mrs. Winterbottom.' 



He did seem rather persistent. 

'She can’t come to the door right Phoebe said. 

I thought he might actually cry Phoebe said that. He chewed on his lip and 
blinked three or four times quickly. 'I'll wait,' he said. 

'Just a minute,' Phoebe said, closing the door. Then she walked through the 
downstairs, pretending to look for her mother. 'Mom!' she called. 'Yoo-hoo!' 
She went upstairs, thumping on the steps as loudly as she could. 'Mother!' 

Phoebe and I returned to the door. He was still standing there with his 
hands in his pockets staring mournfully at Phoebe's house. ’That’s strange,’ 
Phoebe said to him. 'I thought she was here, but she must have gone out. 
There's a whole lot of other people here though,' she added quickly. 'Scads 
and scads of people, but no Mrs. Winterbottom. 

He chewed on his lip and hung his head like a sad old dog. 'I'll see Mr. 
Winterbottom then,’ he said. 

'Sorry,' Phoebe said. 'There are scads and scads of other people here, but 
no Mr. Winterbottom either. 

'Is Mrs. Winterbottom your mother?' he asked. 

'Yes' Phoebe said. 'Would you like me to leave a message?’ 

The little pink circles on his cheeks became even pinker. 'No!' he said. 'No. 
I don't think so. No.' He looked up and down the street and then up at the 
number above the door. 

'What's your name?' he asked. 

'Phoebe.' 

'Phoebe Winterbottom?' 


'That's right.' 



He repeated her name. 'Phoebe Winterbottom.' I thought he was going to 
make a joke about her name, but he didn't. He glanced at me. 'Are you a 
Winterbottom too?' he asked. 

’No,’ I said. 'I'm a visitor. 

And then he left. He just turned around, walked slowly down the porch 
steps and on down the street. We waited until he had turned the corner 
before we left. We ran all the way to Mary Lou’s Phoebe was certain that the 
young man was going to ambush us. Honestly. Like I said, she has a vivid 
imagination. 


9. The Message 

Just before we reached Mary Lou’s house, Phoebe said, 'Mary Lou’s family 
is not nearly as civilized as ours.’ 

’In what way?’ I asked. 

’Oh, you'll see,' Phoebe said. 

Mary Lou Finney and Ben Finney were both in our class at school. At first, 
I thought Mary Lou and Ben were sister and brother, but Phoebe told me 
they were cousins Ben was living with Mary Lou's family temporarily. 
Apparently, there was always at least one stray relative living at the Finneys 
temporarily. 

It was complete pandemonium at the Finneys Mary Lou had an older sister 
and three brothers. In addition, there were her parents and Ben. There were 
footballs and basketballs lying all over the place, and boys sliding down the 
banister and leaping over tables and talking with their mouths full and 
interrupting everyone with endless questions. Phoebe took one look around 
and whispered to me, 'My parents are ever so organized, but Mary Lou's 
parents do not seem to have much control over things' Phoebe could sound a 
bit prissy sometimes 

Mr. Finney was lying in the bathtub, with all his clothes on, reading a 
book. From Mary Lou's bedroom window I saw Mrs. Finney lying on top of 
the garage. She had a pillow under her head. 'What's she doing?' I asked 
Mary Lou. 


Mary Lou peered out the window. 'King of kings! She's taking a nap.' 


When Mr. Finney got out of the bathtub, he went out in the back yard and 
started throwing a football around with Dennis and Dougie, two of Mary 
Lou’s brothers. Mr. Finney shouted. ’Over here!' and 'Thataway!' and 'Way to 
go!’ 

The previous weekend, we had had a school sports day. Parents were 
watching their children show off at gymnastics and running, and there were 
even some events for the parents to do, such as the three-legged race and 
pass-the-grapefruit. My father could not come, but Mary Lou’s parents were 
there and so were Phoebe's 

Phoebe had said, ’The games are a little childish sometimes, which is why 
my parents don't usually participate.’ Her parents stood on the sidelines 
while Mr. and Mrs. Finney ran around shouting, 'Over here!' and 'Way-ta- 
go!' and pouring cups of water on each other's heads. In the three-legged 
race, the Finneys kept falling over. 

Phoebe said to me, ’I wonder if Mary Lou is embarrassed because of the 
way her parents are acting.' 

I didn't think it was embarrassing. I thought it was nice, but I didn't say so 
to Phoebe. I think that deep down Phoebe thought it was nice too, and she 
wished her own parents would act more like the Finneys. She couldn't admit 
this though and, in a way, I liked this about Phoebe - that she tried to defend 
her family. 

On the day that Phoebe and I met the potential lunatic and then went over 
to Mary Lou’s, a couple of other peculiar things happened. We were sitting 
on the floor of Mary Lou’s room, sorting through a huge pile of old shoes 
and crumpled belts. Phoebe was telling Mary Lou about the mysterious 
potential lunatic. Mary Lou’s brothers, Dennis, Doug and Tommy, kept 
dashing in and out of the room, jumping over the pile of shoes and belts and 
leaping on the bed and squirting us with squirt guns. 

Mary Lou’s cousin Ben was lying on her bed, staring at me with his black, 
black eyes. They looked like two sparkly black discs set into big, round 



sockets. His dark eyelashes were long and feathery, casting little shadows on 
his cheeks. 

'I like your hair,' he said to me. 'Can you sit on it?’ 

'Yes, if I want.’ 

Ben picked up a piece of paper from Mary Lou’s desk, lay back down on 
the bed and started drawing. 

Mary Lou asked Phoebe what she had written in her journal. 'Nothing 
much,' Phoebe said. The journals were a big topic of conversation at school. 
At the end of the last school year, apparently, their English teacher asked 
each of them to keep a journal for the summer. They had to turn these in to 
Mr. Birkway, the new English teacher, on the first day of school. Now 
every- one seemed enormously curious as to what everyone else had written. 
I was relieved that I had not had to submit one, since I was new at the school 
and didn't know about the journal assignment. 

Ben said, ’Want to see?’ and he held his drawing over the edge of the bed. 
It was a picture of two figures. One was a lizard-like creature with long 
black hair that, as it ran down the lizard's back and under its bottom, became 
a chair with legs. Underneath this, Ben had written.' Salamander sitting on 
her hair’. The other figure was a huge bumble-bee with tiny little blue jeans 
on its legs and a short crew cut on its head. Underneath this, Ben had 
written, ’Free Bee'. 

'Very amusing,' Phoebe said. She left the room, and Mary Lou followed 
her. 

I turned around to hand the drawing back to Ben, just as he leaned forward 
and mashed his lips into my collarbone. His lips rested there a moment. My 
nose was pressed into his hair, which smelled like grapefruit. It was his 
shampoo, I suppose. Then he rolled off the bed, grabbed the drawing and 
dashed out of the room. 

Did he actually kiss my collarbone? And if he did, why did he do that? If I 
had not turned when I did, would the kiss have ended up somewhere else, 
like on my mouth, for example? That was a rather chilling thought. The 
more I thought about it, the more I wondered if I had imagined that it even 



happened at all. Maybe he merely brushed against me as he was rolling off 
the bed. 


On the way home from Mary Lou's that day, Phoebe said, 'Wasn't it ever 
so-so-so loud there?' 

'At the Finneys?' I said. 

'Yes, at the Finneys' she said. 'Where did you think I meant?' 

'You're just jealous' I said. 

'I am not. I'm just telling you that it seemed awfully loud over there.' 

'I didn't mind,' I said. I was thinking of something my father once said to 
my mother: 'We'll fill the house up with children! We'll fill it right up to the 
brim!' But they hadn't filled it up. It was just me and them, and then it was 
just me and my father. 

When we got back to Phoebe's house, her mother was lying on the couch, 
dabbing at her eyes with a tissue. 

'Is something wrong?' Phoebe asked. 

'Oh, no,' Mrs. Winterbottom said. 'Nothing's wrong. 

Then Phoebe told her mother about the potential lunatic who had come to 
the house earlier. This news upset Mrs. Winterbottom. She wanted to know 
exactly what he said and what Phoebe said and what he looked like and how 
he acted and how Phoebe acted, on and on. At last, Mrs. Winterbottom said, 
'I think we had better not mention this to your father.' She reached forward 
as if to hug Phoebe, but Phoebe pulled away. 

Later, Phoebe said, 'That's odd. Usually my mother tells my father 
absolutely everything, and I mean every- thing, including what the man at 
the grocery store said and how much bread costs and where you can buy a 
cheaper loaf of bread and what sort of silver polish is better than another and 
what Prudence said and what I said and all that.' 



'Maybe she thinks your father would be angry about your talking with a 
stranger,’ I said. 'Maybe she's just trying to save you from getting into 
trouble.' 

'I still don’t like keeping it secret from him,' Phoebe said. 

We walked out onto her porch and there, lying on the top step, was a white 
envelope. There was no name or anything on the outside. I thought it was 
one of those advertisements for painting your house or cleaning your 
carpets. Phoebe picked it up and opened it. 'Gosh,' she said. Inside was a 
small piece of blue paper and on it was printed this message: Don't judge a 
man until you've walked two moons in his moccasins. 

'What an odd thing,' Phoebe said. 

I looked at the paper. At first, I had the funny sensation that it was from 
my father, because he is always saying things like this He is a regular book 
of proverbs. But the handwriting was not at all like my father's. 

Phoebe showed the message to her sister Prudence and her mother. Mrs. 
Winterbottom clutched at her collar. 'Who could it be for?’ she asked. 

Mr. Winterbottom came in the back door, carrying his golf clubs. Mrs. 
Winterbottom showed him the message. 'Who could it be for?’ Mrs. 
Winterbottom repeated. 

'I couldn't say, really,' Mr. Winterbottom said. 

'But, George, why would someone send us that message?’ 

'I couldn't say, Norma. Maybe it isn't for us.’ Mr. Winterbottom set his golf 
clubs down beside the refrigerator. He did not seem very bothered by the 
message. 

'Not for us?' Mrs. Winterbottom said. 'But, it was on our steps' 

'Really, Norma. It could be for anyone. 


'But, honey bun—' 



Maybe it's for Prudence. Or Phoebe.’ 


Prudence said, 'It's not for me.' 

'But, how do you know that?' Mrs. Winterbottom said. 

'I just know it,' Prudence said. 

'Phoebe?' Mrs. Winterbottom asked. 'Is it for you?' 

'For me?' Phoebe said, 'I don't think so, 

'Well. Who is it for?' Mrs. Winterbottom said. 

Prudence looked at her father who looked Phoebe, who looked at me and I 
Winterbottom. 

'We honestly can't say' Phoebe said. 

Mrs. Winterbottom looked extensively worried. I believe she thought it 
came from the potential lunatic looked at Mrs. 

10. Huzza, Huzza 

I had just finished telling Gram and Gramps about the mysterious message 
when Gramps pulled off the freeway. He said he was tired of chewing up the 
road and besides, the little white lines down the middle of the highway were 
starting to wiggle. As he drove into Madison, Wisconsin, Gram said, 'I feel a 
little sorry for Mrs. Winterbottom. She doesn't sound very happy. 

'They all sound a little screwy, if you ask me, Gramps said. 

'Being a mother is like trying to hold a wolf by the ears' Gram said. 
'Especially being a mother of one or two. If you have three or four - or more 
- chickabiddies, you're dancing on a hot griddle all the time. You don't have 
time to think about anything else. If you've only got one or two, it's almost 
harder. You have room left over - empty spaces that you think you've got to 
fill up.' 

'Well, it sure ain't a cinch being a father, either, Gramps said. 


Gram touched his arm. 'Horsefeathers' she said. 


Round and round we drove until Gramps saw a car pull out of a space 
along one of the main roads Another car saw it too, but Gramps was fast and 
pulled in, and when the man in the other car waved his fist at Gramps, 
Gramps said, 'I'm a Veteran. See this leg? Shrapnel from German guns. I 
saved our country!' The man stared at Gramps. 

We did not have the correct change for the parking meter, so Gramps 
wrote a long note about how he was a visitor from Bybanks, Kentucky, and 
he was a World War Veteran with German shrapnel in his leg, and he kindly 
appreciated the members of the fair city of Madison allowing him to park in 
this space even though he did not have the correct change for the meter. He 
put this note on the dashboard. 

'Is it true?' I asked him. 'Do you really have German shrapnel in your leg?' 

Gramps looked up at the sky. 'Mighty nice day. he said. 

The shrapnel was imaginary. Sometimes I am a little slow to figure these 
things out. My father once said I was as gullible as a fish. I thought he said 
edible. I thought he meant I was tasty. 

Gram said, 'Where do you think the main action is?' 

Gramps looked all around. He stepped out in the middle of the road and 
hailed the bus, which was bearing down on him. He spoke to the driver for a 
minute and then waved us all aboard. 

The city of Madison sprawls between two lakes, Lake Mendota and Lake 
Monona, and dribbling out of these lakes are other smaller lakes. There are 
about a million parks and a million bicycles with special policemen and 
traffic lights just for bicyclists. It seemed as if the whole city was on 
vacation, with people riding around on their bikes and walking along the 
lakes and feeding the ducks and eating and canoeing and windsurfing. I'd 
never seen anything like it. Gram kept saying, 'Huzza, huzza!' She was so 
excited. 



There's a whole part of the city where no cars can go, and thousands of 
people stroll around eating ice-cream. We stopped at the Sunprint Cafe and 
ate banana muffins A little later we went into Elia's Kosher Deli and Ice- 
Cream Parlor and ate pastrami sandwiches and kosher dill pickles, followed 
by raspberry ice-cream. After we walked around some more, we were 
hungry again, and so we went into the Steep and Brew and had lemon tea 
and blueberry muffins. 

All the while, I heard the whispers: rush, hurry, rush. Gram and Gramps 
moved so slowly. 

'Shouldn't we go now?' I kept asking, but Gram would say, 'Huzza, huzza!' 
and Gramps would say, 'We'll go soon, chickabiddy, soon.' 

'Don't you want to send any postcards?' Gram asked. 

'No, I do not.' 

'Not even to your daddy?' 

'No, I do not.' There was a good reason for this. All along her trip, my 
mother had sent me postcards She wrote, 'Here I am in the Badlands, 
missing you terribly,' and-'This is Mount Rushmore, but I don't see any 
Presidents' faces, I only see yours.' The last postcard arrived two days after 
we found out she wasn't coming back. It was from Coeur d'Alene, Idaho. On 
the front was a picture of a beautiful blue lake surrounded by tall evergreens. 
On the back she had written, 'Tomorrow I'll be in Lewiston. I love you, my 
Salamanca Tree.' 

'I sure hate to get back on the road,' Gramps said, 'but time 's-a-wastin!' 

Yes, I thought, yes, yes, yes! 

Gram settled back for a nap while I said a few thousand more prayers. The 
next thing I knew. Gramps was pulling off the road again. 'Lookee here.' he 
said. 'The Wisconsin Dells.' He drove into a huge parking area and said, 
'Why don't you two go look around? I'm going to get a little shut-eye. 


Gram and I poked our noses into an old fort and then sat on the grass 
watching a group of Native Americans dance and beat drums. My mother 



had not liked the term 'Native Americans'. She thought it sounded primitive 
and stiff: She said, 'My great-grandmother was a Seneca Indian, and I'm 
proud of it. She wasn't a Seneca Native American. Indian sounds much more 
exotic, much more brave and elegant.' 

In school, our teacher told us we had to say Native American, but I agreed 
with my mother. Indian sounded much better. My mother and I liked this 
Indian-ness in our background. She said this exotic substance in our blood 
made us appreciate the gifts of nature; it made us closer to the land. 

I lay back and closed my eyes, listening to the drums beat rush-rush-rush 
and the dancers chant hurry-hurry- hurry. Someone was jingling bells, too, 
and for a moment I thought of Christmas and sleigh bells When I opened my 
eyes again, Gram was gone. 

I glanced around, trying to remember where we had parked the car. I 
looked through the crowd, back at the trees, over at the concession stand. 
'They've gone,' I thought. 'They've left me.' I started pushing through the 
people. 

The crowd was clapping, the drums were beating. I was all turned around 
and could not remember which way we had come. There were three signs 
indicating different parking areas. The drums got louder and louder. I pushed 
further into the crowd of people, who were now clapping louder, in time 
with the drums. 

The Indians had formed two circles, one inside the other, and were 
hopping up and down. The men danced in the outer circle and wore feather 
head-dresses and short leather aprons. On their feet were moccasins, and I 
thought again about Phoebe's message: Don't judge a man until you've 
walked two moons in his moccasins. 

Inside the circle of men, the women in long dresses and ropes of beads had 
joined arms and were dancing around one older woman who was wearing a 
regular cotton dress. On her head was an enormous head-dress which had 
slipped down over her forehead. 

I looked closer. The woman in the centre was hopping up and down. On 
her feet were flat, white shoes. In the space between drum beats, I heard her 
say, 'Huzza, huzza.' 



It was Gram. 


11. Flinching 

Early the next morning, we left Wisconsin and drove on, eating up the 
road through the lower rim of Minnesota. The land here was hilly and green, 
forests tucked in close beside the road from time to time, and the air smelled 
of pine. 

'At last,' Gramps said, ’some scenery! I love a place that has scenery, don't 
you, chickabiddy?’ 

I had not said anything about what had happened the day before - about 
being scared down to my very bones when I thought they had left me. I don't 
know what came over me. Ever since my mother left us that April day, I 
suspected that everyone was going to leave, one by one. 

I was glad to be able to go on with Phoebe's story, because when I was 
talking about Phoebe, I wasn't thinking about too much else. I wasn't 
thinking every second about the cars barrelling past us at sixty-five miles an 
hour. I wasn't thinking about Dad and Margaret. I was trying not to think 
about my mother, but often, when I talked about Phoebe, I saw my mother's 
face behind the things I was saying. 

'Did Peeby get any more messages?’ Gram asked. She did. The following 
Saturday. Phoebe and 1 were going to Mary Lou’s again. As we left Phoebe's 
house there on the front steps was another white envelope with a blue sheet 
of paper inside. The message was: 

Everyone has his own agenda. 

Phoebe and I looked up and down the street. There was no sign of the 
message-leaver. We weren't entirely sure what 'agenda' meant, but we 
looked it up at Mary Lou’s. Mary Lou thought the messages (this one and the 
other one) were intriguing. 'How exciting!’ she said. 'I wish someone would 
leave me messages.’ 

Phoebe thought the messages were spooky. It was not the words that 
bothered her - there was nothing too frightening there - it was the idea that 


someone was sneaking around and leaving them on Phoebe's porch without 
anyone seeing who this person was She worried that someone was watching 
their house, waiting for the right moment to leave the message. Phoebe was 
a champion worrier. 

After we looked up 'agenda', we tried to figure out what the message 
meant. ’OK,' Phoebe said, 'an agenda is a list of things to be discussed at a 
meeting... 

'So, maybe it's for your dad,' I suggested. 'Does he go to meetings?' 

'Well, I guess' Phoebe said. 'He's ever so busy all day long.' 

'Maybe it's from his boss' Mary Lou said. 'Maybe your father hasn't been 
conducting his meetings very well. 

'My father is ever so organized,' Phoebe said. 'What about the other 
message?' Mary Lou said. 'What was that one again?' 

"Don't judge a man until you've walked two moons in his moccasins." ' 

'I know what it means.' I said. 'I've heard my father use it lots of times.' 

'Oh, really?' Phoebe said. 

'I used to imagine that there were two moons sitting in a pair of Indian 
shoes, but my father said it means that you shouldn't judge someone until 
you've walked in their moccasins. Until you've been in their shoes. In their 
place.' 

'And your father says this often?' Phoebe said. 

'I know what you're thinking,' I said, 'but my father isn't creeping around 
leaving those messages. It isn't his handwriting.' 

When Ben came into Mary Lou's room, she asked him what he thought it 
meant. He took a sheet of paper from her desk and quickly drew a cartoon. It 
was a little spooky, because what he drew was almost identical to what I 
used to imagine a pair of Indian moccasins with two moons in them. 



'Maybe,' Mary Lou said to Phoebe, 'your father is being too quick to judge 
people at work. He needs to walk in their moccasins first.' 


'My father does not judge too quickly,' Phoebe said. 

'You don't have to get defensive,' Ben said. 

'I am not getting defensive. I'm just telling you that my father does not 
judge too quickly.' 

Later, we went to the drug store. I thought it was going to be only me and 
Phoebe and Mary Lou going, but by the time we left the house, we had 
accumulated Tommy and Dougie as well. At the last minute, Ben said he 
was coming too. 

'I don't know how you can stand it.' Phoebe said to Mary Lou. 

'Stand what:" 

Phoebe pointed to Tommy and Dougie, who were running around like 
wound-up toys, making aeroplane and train noises and zooming in between 
us and then running up ahead and falling over each other and crying and 
then leaping back up again and socking each other and chasing after bumble- 
bees. 

'Oh, I'm used to it,' Mary Lou said. 'My brothers are always doing beef- 
brained things' 

Ben walked right behind me all the way, which made me a little nervous. I 
kept turning around to see what he was doing back there, but he was just 
strolling along smiling. 

Tommy bashed into me, and when I started to fall backwards, Ben caught 
me. He put his arms right around my waist and held on to me, even after it 
was obvious that I was not going to fall. I could smell that funny grapefruit 
smell again and feel his face pressed up against my hair. 

'Let go,' I said, but he didn't let go. I had an odd sensation, as if a little 
creature was crawling up my spine. It wasn't a horrible sensation, more light 



and tickly. I thought maybe he dropped something down my shirt. 'Let go!' I 
said, and finally he did. 

It was at the drug store that I got a little scared. I suppose I had been 
listening to Phoebe's tales of lunatics and axe murderers too much. Phoebe 
and I were looking at the magazines, when I felt as if someone was watching 
us. I looked over to where Ben was standing, but he and Mary Lou were 
busy rummaging around in the chocolate bars. The feeling did not go away. I 
turned the other way around, and there on the far side of the store was the 
nervous young man who had come to Phoebe's house. He was at the cash 
register, paying for something, but he was staring at us while he was handing 
his money to the clerk. I nudged Phoebe. 

'Oh, no,' she said, 'the lunatic.' 

She hustled over to Ben and Mary Lou. 'Look, quick,' Phoebe said. 'It's the 
lunatic. 

'Where?' 

'At the cash register.' 

"There's nobody there,' Mary Lou said. 

'Honest, he was there,' Phoebe said. 'I swear he was. Ask Sal. 

'He was there,' I said. 

All the way back to Mary Lou's house, we kept turning around and 
glancing over our shoulders, but there was no sign of the lunatic. We stayed 
at Mary Lou's for a little longer before we started back to Phoebe's house. 

We were only about a block away when we heard someone running up 
behind us 

Phoebe thought we were doomed. 'If we get our heads bashed in and he 
leaves us here on the sidewalk—' she said. 

I felt a hand on my shoulder and I opened my mouth to scream, but 
nothing came out. My brain was saying, 'Scream! Scream!' but my voice was 
completely shut off. 



It was Ben. He said, 'Did I scare you?' 


'That wasn't very funny,' Phoebe said. 

'I'll walk home with you,' he said. 'Just in case there are any - any - lunatics 
around.' He had difficulty saying the word 'lunatic'. 

On the way to Phoebe's house Ben said some odd things. First, he said. 
'Maybe you shouldn't call him a lunatic. 

'And why not?' Phoebe said. 

'Because a lunatic is - it means - it sounds like oh, never mind.' He would 
not explain, and he seemed embarrassed to have mentioned this in the first 
place. Then he said to me. 'Don't people touch each other at your house?' 

'What's that supposed to mean?' 

'I just wondered.' he said. 'Do people go around touching you?' 

'No. Of course not.' I didn't understand what he was getting at. 

He was staring at me with those round black eyes. 'I thought so. You flinch 
every time someone touches you.' 

'I do not.' 

'You do.' He touched my arm. I have to admit, my instinct was to flinch 
but I caught myself I pretended not to notice that his hand was resting there 
on my arm. That creature tickling my spine was back. 

'Hmm,' he said, like a doctor examining a patient. 'Hmm.' He removed his 
hand. Then he said, 'Where's your mother?' 

I had not mentioned my mother to anyone, not even Phoebe, except for the 
one time Phoebe had asked about her and I had only said she didn't live with 
us. 



Ben said, 'I saw your father once, but I’ve never seen your mother. Where 
is she?’ 

’She's in Idaho. Lewiston, Idaho.’ 

’What’s she doing there?’ Ben said. 

’I don’t really feel like saying.’ It didn’t occur to me to ask him where his 
mother was. 

He touched my arm again. When I flinched, he said. ’Ha! Gotcha!’ 

It bothered me, what he had said. It occurred to me that my father didn’t 
hug me quite as much any more, and that maybe I was starting to flinch 
whenever anyone did touch me. I wasn’t always like that. Before - before 
everything went all wrong - we were a hugging family. As I walked along 
with Ben and Phoebe, T saw a picture in my mind of my mother with her 
arms around me. I saw another picture of myself when I was three years old. 
My mother was carrying me on her back up to the bam. My arms were 
wrapped around her neck and my face was tickled by her hair. Her hair 
smelled like roses. She licked the skin on my arm and said, 'Urn, you're a 
delicious Salamanca Tree, a most delicious Salamanca Tree.' 

I saw another vision of myself when I was nine or ten. My mother crawled 
into bed with me and snuggled close and said, ’Let's build a raft and float 
away down a river.' I used to think about that raft a lot, and I actually 
believed that one day we might build a raft and float away down a river 
together. But when she went to Lewiston, Idaho, she went alone. 

Ben touched Phoebe’s arm. She flinched. 'Ha,' he said. 'Gotcha. You’re 
jumpy, too, Free Bee.' 

And that surprised me. I had already noticed how tense Phoebe’s whole 
family seemed, how tidy, how respectable, and how thumpingly stiff. Was I 
becoming like that? Why were they like that? A couple of times I had seen 
Phoebe’s mother try to touch Phoebe or Prudence or Mr. Winterbottom, but 
they all drew back from her. It was as if they had outgrown her. 


Had I been drawing away from my own mother? Did she have empty 
spaces left over? Was that why she left? 



When we reached Phoebe's driveway. Ben said, 'I guess you're safe now. I 
guess I'll go. 

'Go ahead.' Phoebe said. 

We stood there. He stood there. Mrs. Cadaver came screeching up to the 
kerb in her yellow Volkswagen, with her wild red witch hair flying all over 
the place. She waved at us and then started pulling things out of the car and 
plopping them on the sidewalk. 

'Who's that?' Ben asked. 

'Mrs. Cadaver.' 

'Cadaver? Like dead body?' 

'That's right.' 

'Hi, Sal!' Mrs. Cadaver called. She was dumping a huge pile of lumpy bags 
on the sidewalk. Ben walked over and asked if she wanted any help carrying 
things inside. 

'My, you're very polite,' Mrs. Cadaver said, flashing her wild gray eyes. 

'She scares me half to death,' Phoebe said. 

Phoebe's mother came to her front door. 'Phoebe? What are you doing? 

Are you coming in? Who is that?' She was pointing to Ben. 

Phoebe whispered to Ben, 'Don't go inside. 

'Why not?' he said, rather too loudly, because Mrs. Cadaver looked up and 
said, 'Why not what?' 

'Oh, nothing,' Phoebe said. 

Mrs. Cadaver said, 'Sal, do you want to come in?' 

'I was just going to Phoebe's,' I said, glad for an excuse. 



Phoebe pulled on Ben's sleeve. 'What’s the matter’, he asked. 


'Is something the matter?' Mrs. Cadaver said in her crackly dead-leaf 
voice. 

'Phoebe!' her mother called. ’Sweetie!’ 

We left Ben. Just as we were going into Phoebe’s house, we turned around 
and saw Ben lift something off the sidewalk. It was a shiny, new axe. 

Phoebe's mother said, ’Is that Mary Lou's brother? Was he walking you 
home? Where’s Mary Lou?' 

’I hate it when you ask me three questions in a row, Phoebe said. Through 
the window, we could see Ben lugging the axe up the front steps of Mrs. 
Cadaver’s house. Phoebe opened the window and called out, ’Don’t go in!’ 
but when Mrs. Cadaver held the front door open, Ben disappeared inside. 

'Phoebe, what are you doing?’ her mother asked. 

Then Phoebe pulled the envelope out of her pocket, the envelope 
containing the latest message. 'I found this outside,' Phoebe said. 

Mrs. Winterbottom opened the envelope carefully, as if it might contain a 
miniature bomb. She read it. 

’Oh, sweetie,' she said. ’Who is it from? Who is it for? What does it mean?' 

Phoebe explained what an agenda was. 

’I know what an agenda is, Phoebe,' she said. 'I don’t like this at all. I want 
to know who is sending these.' 

I was waiting for Phoebe to tell her about seeing the nervous young man at 
the drug store, but Phoebe didn't mention it. 

It was with great relief that we saw Ben leave Mrs. Cadaver's house a little 
later. He appeared to be all in one piece. 



That day, when I got home, my father was in the garage, tinkering with the 
car. He was leaning over the engine, and I couldn't see his face at first. 

'Dad — what do you think it means if someone touches someone else and 
the person being touched flinches? Do you think it means that the person 
being touched is getting too stiff? I mean, let’s say a person didn't used to 
flinch, but now- 

Dad turned slowly around. His eyes were red and puffy. I think he had 
been crying. His hands and shirt were greasy but when he hugged me, I 
didn't flinch. 


12. The Marriage Bed 

When I first started telling Phoebe's story, Gram and Gramps sat quietly 
and listened. Gramps was concentrating on the road, and Gram would gaze 
out the window. Occasionally, they would turn to look at me, or interject a 
'Gol-dang!' or a ’No kidding?’ But as I got farther into the story, they began 
to interrupt more and more. 

When I told them about the message, Everyone has his own agenda, Gram 
thumped on the dashboard and said, ’Isn’t that the truth! Lordy! Isn't that 
what it is all about?’ 

I said, ’How do you mean?’ 

’Everybody is just walking along concerned with his own problems, his 
own life, his own little worries. And, we’re all expecting other people to tune 
into our own agenda. "Look at my worry. Worry with me. Step into my life. 
Care about my problems. Care about me. Gram sighed. 

Gramps was scratching his head. 'You turning into a philosopher or 
something?’ 

’Mind your own agenda,’ she said. 

When I mentioned about Ben asking where my mother was and my saying 
that she was in Lewiston, but that I didn't want to elaborate. Gram and 
Gramps looked at each other. 


Gramps said. 'One time when my father took off for six months and didn't 
tell anybody where he was going, and my best friend asked me where my 
father was, I hauled off and punched him in the jaw. My best friend. I 
punched him right in the jaw.’ 

'You never told me that,' Gram said. 'I hope he socked you back.' 

Gramps opened his mouth and pointed to a gap in his teeth. 'See that? He 
knocked my tooth right out. 

And when I told Gram and Gramps about flinching when Ben touched me 
and about how I went home and found Dad in the garage, Gram unbuckled 
her seat belt, turned all the way around and leaned over the back of her seat. 
She took my hand and kissed it. 

Gramps said, ’Give her one for me, too,’ and so Gram kissed my hand 
again. 

Several times, when I described Phoebe's world of lunatics and axe 
murderers, Gram said, 'Just like Gloria, I swear to goodness. Just exactly like 
Gloria.’ Once, after she said this, Gramps got a dreamy look on his face and 
Gram said, ’Quit that mooning over Gloria. I know what you're thinking.' 

Gramps said, 'Hear that, chickabiddy? This here gooseberry knows 
everything that runs through my head. Isn't she something?’ 

Just before we reached the South Dakota border, Gramps took a detour 
north because he had seen a sign advertising the Pipestone National 
Monument in Pipestone, Minnesota. On the sign was a picture of a Native 
American smoking a pipe. 

'What do you want to go see an old Indian smoking a pipe for?’ Gram 
asked. She didn't like the term 'Native American' any more than my mother 
did. 

'I just do.’ Gramps said. 'We might not ever get the chance again. 


’To see an Indian smoking a pipe?’ Gram said. 'Will it take very long?’ I 
asked, as the air screamed. Hurry, hurry, hurry. 



'Not too long, chickabiddy. We’ve got to cool off our car-bust-er-ators, 
These roads are taking the poop out of me. 


The detour to Pipestone wound through a cool, dark forest and, if you 
closed your eyes and smelled the air. you could smell Bybanks. Kentucky. 
Pipestone was a small town. Everywhere we went, people were talking to 
each other: standing there talking, or sitting on a bench talking, or walking 
along the street talking. When we passed by, they looked up at us, right into 
our faces and said 'Hi' or 'Howdy', and, although it sounds a little corny to 
say it we felt right at home there. It was so like Bybanks, where everyone 
you see stops to say something because they know you and have known you 
their whole lives. 

We went to the Pipestone National Monument and saw Indians thunking 
away at the stone in the quarry. I asked one if he was a Native American, but 
he said, 'No. I'm a person.' I said, ’But, are you a Native American person?’ 
He said, 'No, I'm an American Indian person.' I said, 'So am I. In my blood.’ 

We watched other American Indian persons making pipes out of the stone. 
In the Pipe Museum, we learned more about pipes than any human being 
ought to know. In a little clearing outside the museum, an American Indian 
person was sitting on a tree stump smoking a long peace pipe. After 
watching him for about five minutes. Gramps asked if he could try it. 

The man passed Gramps the pipe, and Gramps sat down on the grass, took 
two puffs and passed it to Gram. She didn't even blink. She took two puffs 
and passed it to me. I didn't want to hurt anyone's feelings, so I took it. There 
was a sweet, sticky taste on the end of the pipe. With the stem in my mouth, 

I gave it two little kisses which is what it looked like Gram and Gramps had 
done. The smoke came into my mouth, and I held it there while I passed the 
pipe back. 

I held that smoke in my mouth while Gram and Gramps puffed some 
more. I was feeling slightly whang-doodled. I opened my mouth a wee bit, 
and a tiny stream of smoke curled out into the air and, when I saw that, for 
some reason, I was reminded of my mother. It didn't make any sense, but my 
brain was saying, ’There goes your mother,’ and I watched the Little trail of 
smoke disappear into the air. 



Gramps went back into the shop attached to the Pipe Museum and bought 
two peace pipes. One was for him and one was for me. 'It's not for smoking 
with,' he said. 'It's for remembering with.' 

That night we stayed in Injun Joe's Peace Palace Motel. On a sign in the 
lobby, someone had crossed out 'Injun' and written 'Native American' so the 
whole sign read: 'Native American Joe's Peace Palace Motel.' In our room, 
the 'Injun Joe's' embroidered on the towels had been changed with black 
marker to 'Indian Joe's'. I wished everybody would just make up their minds. 

By now, I was used to staying in a room with Gram and Gramps. They did 
exactly the same things in the same order each night. Gramps brought in the 
suitcases and tossed them on the beds. Gram opened up their suitcase and 
fished out their pajamas. She handed Gramps' small black shaving bag to 
him and he flung it on the sink in the bathroom. She took out her own blue 
make-up bag and carried it to the bathroom, where she set it on the sink next 
to Gramps' black bag. 

Returning to the suitcase, she removed a clean shirt and clean underwear 
for Gramps, and a clean dress and clean underwear for herself. Gramps 
stuffed hangers into the shirt and the dress while Gram placed the underwear 
in a dresser drawer. Then, Gram straightened the shirt and dress that Gramps 
had rammed into the closet. 

The first night, I watched them and then I repeated everything they had 
done: I opened my suitcase, took out what I needed, put it away. After the 
first night, I just followed along behind them, doing everything they did. 

Every night, when they climbed into bed, they lay right beside each other 
on their backs and Gramps said, every single night, 'Well, this ain't our 
marriage bed, but it will do. 

Probably the most precious thing in the whole world to Gramps - beside 
Gram - was their marriage bed. This is what he called their bed back home 
in Bybanks, Kentucky. One of the stories that Gramps liked to tell was about 
how he and all his brothers had been born in that bed, and all Gram's and 
Gramps' own children had been born in that same bed. 



When Gramps tells this story, he starts with when he was seventeen-years- 
old and living with his parents in Bybanks. That's when he met Gram. She 
was visiting her aunt who lived over the meadow from where Gramps lived. 

'I was a wild thing, then.’ Gramps said. 'And I didn't stand still for any girl, 
I can tell you that. They had to try to catch me on the run. But, when I saw 
your grandmother running in the meadow, with her long hair as silky as a 
filly's, I was the one who was trying to do the catching. Talk about wild 
things! Your grandmother was the wildest, most untamed, most 'ornery and 
beautiful creature ever to grace this earth.' 

Gramps said he followed her like a sick, old dog for twenty-two days, and 
on the twenty-third day, he marched up to her father and asked if he could 
marry her. 

Her father said, 'If you can get her to stand still long enough and if she'll 
have you, I guess you can. 

When Gramps asked Gram to marry him, she said, 'Do you have a dog?' 

Gramps said that yes, as a matter of fact, he had a fat old beagle, named 
Sadie. Gram said, 'And, where does she sleep?’ 

Gramps stumbled around a bit and said, ’To tell you the truth, she sleeps 
right next to me, but if we was to get married, I—’ 

'When you come in the door at night,’ Gram said, ’what does that dog do?’ 

Gramps couldn't figure what she was getting at, so he just told the truth. 
'She jumps all over me, a-lickin and a-howlin.' 

'And, then, what do you do?' Gram asked. 

'Well, gosh!’ Gramps said. He did not like to admit it, but he said, 'I take 
her in my lap and pet her till she calms down, and sometimes I sing her a 
song. You're making me feel foolish,' he said to Gram. 

'I don't mean to,’ she said. ’You’ve told me all I need to know. I figure if 
you treat a dog that good, you'll treat me better. I figure if that old beagle 
Sadie loves you so much, I'll probably love you better. Yes. I'll marry you. 



They were married three months later. During that time between his 
proposal and their wedding day, Gramps and his father and brothers' built a 
small house in the clearing behind the first meadow. 

'We didn't have time,' Gramps said, 'to completely finish it, and there 
wasn't a single stick of furniture in it, but that didn't matter. We were going 
to sleep there on our wedding night, all the same.’ 

They were married in an aspen grove on a clear July day, and afterwards 
they and all their friends and relatives had a wedding supper on the banks of 
the river. During the supper, Gramps noticed that his father and two of his 
brothers were absent. He thought maybe they were planning a wet cheer, 
which is when the men kidnap the groom for an hour or so and they all go 
out to the woods and share a bottle of whiskey. Before the end of the supper, 
his father and brothers came back, but they did not kidnap him for a wet 
cheer. Gramps was just as glad, he said, because he needed his wits about 
him that evening. 

After supper, Gramps picked up Gram in his arms and carried her across 
the meadow. Behind them, everyone was singing, 'Oh meet me, in the tulips, 
when the tulips do blooom...' This is what they always sing at weddings 
when the married couple leaves. It is supposed to be a joke, as if Gram and 
Gramps were going away by themselves and might not reappear until the 
following spring when the tulips were in bloom. 

Gramps carried Gram all the way across the meadow and through the trees 
and into the clearing where their little house stood. He carried her in through 
the door, and took one look around and started to cry. 

'In my life.' Gram once told me, 'I only saw your grandfather cry five 
times. Once was when he carried me into that house. The only other times 
were when each of our four babies was born. 

The reason Gramps cried when he carried Gram into the house was that 
there, in the centre of the bedroom, stood his own parents' bed - the bed that 
Gramps and each of his brothers had been born in - the one his parents had 
always slept in. This was where his father and brothers had disappeared to 
during the wedding supper. They had been moving the bed into Gram and 



Gramps' new house. At the foot of the bed, wiggling and slurping, was 
Sadie, Gramps’ old beagle dog. 

Gramps always ends this story by saying, ’That bed has been around my 
whole entire life, and I’m going to die in that bed, and then that bed will 
know every- thing there is to know about me.’ 

So, each night on our trip out to Idaho, Gramps patted the bed in the motel 
and said, 'Well, this ain’t our marriage bed, but it will do,’ while I lay in the 
next bed wondering if I would ever have a marriage bed like theirs. 

13. Bouncing Birkway 

It was time to tell Gram and Gramps about Mr. Birkway. 

Mr. Birkway was mighty strange. He was an English teacher, and when I 
met him on that first day in my new school, I didn’t know what to make of 
him. I thought he might have a few squirrels in the attic of his brain. He was 
one of those energetic teachers who loved his subject half to death and 
leaped about the room dramatically, waving his arms and clutching his chest 
and patting people on the back. 

He said, 'Brilliant!' and ’Wonderful!’ and ’Terrific!’ He was quite tall and 
slim, and his bushy black hair made him look like a wild native at times, but 
he had enormous deep brown cow like eyes that sparkled all over the place 
(like Ben’s), and when he turned these eyes on you, you felt as if his whole 
purpose in life was to stand there and listen to you, and you alone. 

Midway through the first class, Mr. Birkway asked if we had our summer 
journals. I hadn’t a clue as to what he was talking about. Some of the other 
students started nodding like crazy, and Mr. Birkway spread out his arms 
and said, 'Wonderful! I’m blessed!’ He flung himself up and down the aisles, 
receiving the journals as if they were manna from heaven. ’Thank you,’ he 
said to each journal-giver. 

I was extensively worried. I had no journal. 

On top of Mary Lou Finney's desk were six journals. Six. Mr. Birkway 
said. ’Heavens. Mercy. Is it - can it be - Shakespeare?' He counted the 
journals. 'Six! Brilliant! Magnificent!' 


Christy and Megan, two girls who had their own club called the GGP 
(whatever that meant), were whispering over on the other side of the room 
and casting malevolent looks in Mary Lou's direction. Mary Lou kept her 
hand on top of the journals as Mr. Birkway reached for them. In a low voice 
she said. 'I don't want you to read them.’ 

'What?' Mr. Birkway boomed. 'Not read them?’ The whole room was 
silent. Mr. Birkway scooped up Mary Lou’s journals before she could even 
blink. He said, 'Don't worry, your thoughts are safe with me. Brilliant! 

Thank you!’ 

Another girl, Beth Ann, looked as if she might cry. Phoebe was sending 
me little messages with her eye- brows that indicated that she was not too 
pleased either. I think they were all hoping that Mr. Birkway was not 
actually going to read these journals. 

Mr. Birkway went around the whole room snatching people's journals. 
Alex Cheevey’s journal was covered with basketball stickers. Christy's and 
Megan's were slathered over with pictures of male models. The cover of 
Ben's was a cartoon of a boy with a normal boy’s head, but the arms and legs 
were pencils, and out of the tips of the hands and feet were little bits of 
words 

When he got to Phoebe's desk, Mr. Birkway lifted up her plain journal and 
peeked inside. Phoebe was trying to slide down in her chair. 'I didn't write 
much,' Phoebe said. 'In fact. I can hardly remember what I wrote about at all. 
Mr. Birkway only said, 'Beautiful! and moved on. 

By the time he got to my desk, my heart was clobbering around so hard I 
thought it might leap straight out of my chest. 

'Deprived child,’ he said. 'You didn't have a chance to write a journal.’ 


'I'm new-’ 


'New? How blessed,’ he said. 'There's nothing in this whole wide world 
that is better than a new person!’ 

'So, I didn't know about the journals—' 



'Not to worry!' Mr. Birkway said. 'I'll think of something.' 

I wasn't sure what that meant. I thought maybe he would give me a whole 
lot of extra homework or something. For the rest of the day you could see 
little groups of people asking each other, 'Did you write about me?' I was 
very glad I hadn't written anything. 

After school, Phoebe and I walked home with Mary Lou and Ben, who 
were excited about Mr. Birkway. 'Isn't he terrific?’ they said. At the corner of 
my street, as I turned to leave, Ben said to Phoebe, ’Hey, Free Bee! Did you 
write about me?’ 

For a while, we did not hear any more about the journals. We had 
absolutely no idea of all the trouble they were going to cause. 

14. The Rhododendron 

One Saturday, I was at Phoebe's again. Her father was golfing, and her 
mother was running errands. Mrs. Winterbottom had read out a long list to 
us of where she would be in case we needed her. She almost did not go, 
because she did not want to leave Phoebe and me alone, but Phoebe 
promised to keep all the doors locked and not open the door for anyone. If 
we heard any noises at all, we were supposed to call the police immediately. 
'After you call the police,’ Mrs. Winterbottom said, ’call Mrs. Cadaver. I 
think she’s home today. I'm sure she would come right over. 

’Oh, sure,’ Phoebe whispered to me. ’That’s about the last person I would 
call.’ 

Phoebe imagined that every noise was the lunatic sneaking in or the 
message-leaver creeping up to drop off another anonymous note. She was so 
jumpy that I began to feel uneasy too. 

After her mother left, Phoebe said, 'Mrs. Cadaver works odd hours, doesn't 
she? Sometimes she works every night for a week, straggling home when 
most people are waking up, but sometimes she works during the day. 

'She's a nurse, so I guess she works different shifts,' I said. 


That day Mrs. Cadaver was home, puttering around her garden. We saw 
her from Phoebe's bedroom window. Actually, puttering is not the best 
word. What she was doing was more like slogging and slashing. Mrs. 
Cadaver hacked branches off of trees and hauled these to the back of her lot 
where she lumped them into a pile of branches, which she had hacked off 
last week. 

'I told you she was as strong as an ox,' Phoebe said. 

Next, Mrs. Cadaver slashed and sliced at a pitiful rose bush, which had 
been trying to creep up the side of her house. Then she sheared off the tops 
of the hedge, which borders Phoebe's yard. She moved on to a rhododendron 
bush, which she was poking and prodding when a car pulled into her 
driveway. A tall man with bushy black hair leaped out and, seeing her, he 
practically skipped back to where she was. They hugged each other. 

'Oh, no,' Phoebe said. The man with the bushy black hair was Mr. 

Birkway, our English teacher. 

Mrs. Cadaver pointed to the rhododendron bush and then at the axe, but 
Mr. Birkway shook his head. He disappeared into the garage and returned 
with two shovels Then he and Mrs. Cadaver gouged and prodded and 
tunnelled around in the dirt until the poor old rhododendron hopped onto its 
side. Mrs. Cadaver and Mr. Birkway lugged the bush over to the opposite 
side of the yard where there was a mound of dirt. 

Phoebe's doorbell rang. 'Come with me,' Phoebe said. 

'But, I want to watch Mrs. Cadaver and Mr. Birkway. 

'I'm not answering the door alone,' Phoebe said. 

I went with her. We looked out the window. 

'No one's there,' I said. 

'We're not supposed to open the door. 


'But, no one's there.' 1 said. I flung open the door. No one was on the 
porch. I put one foot on the porch and looked up and down the street. 



'Quick!' Phoebe said. 'Get back in here! Maybe someone is in the bushes' 

I pulled my foot back inside. We closed the door and locked it. By the time 
we returned to Phoebe's bedroom window, Mrs. Cadaver and Mr. Birkway 
had re-planted the bush. 

'Maybe there is something hidden under the bush, Phoebe said. 

'Like what?' 

'Like a dead body. Maybe Mr. Birkway helped her chop up her husband 
and bury him and maybe they were getting worried and decided to disguise 
the spot with a rhododendron bush.' 

I must have looked skeptical. Phoebe said, 'Sal, you never can tell. And, 
Sal, I don't think you or your father should go over there any more.' 

I certainly agreed with her on that one. Dad and I had been there two 
nights earlier, and I had hardly been able to sit still. I started noticing all 
these frightening things in Margaret's house: creepy masks, old swords, 
books with titles like Murder on the Rue Morgue and The Skull and the 
Hatchet. Margaret cornered me in the kitchen and said, 'So, what has your 
father told you about me?' 

'Nothing,' I said. 

'Oh.' She seemed disappointed. 

My father's behaviour was always different at Margaret's. At home, I 
would sometimes find him sitting on his bed staring at the floor, or reading 
through old letters or gazing at the photo album. He looked sad and lonely. 
But at Margaret's, he would smile, and sometimes even laugh, and once she 
touched his hand, and he let her hand rest there on top of his. I didn't like it. I 
didn't want my father to be sad, but at least when he was sad, I knew he was 
remembering my mother. So when Phoebe suggested that my father and I 
should not go to Margaret's, I was quite willing to agree with that notion. 


When Phoebe's mother came home from running all her errands, she 
looked terrible. She was sniffling and blowing her nose. Phoebe asked her if 
she was sick. 

Mrs. Winterbottom looked at Phoebe and then straight at me. 'No,' she 
said, 'I think I have an allergy.’ 

Phoebe said that we were going to do our home- work. Upstairs, I said, 
'Maybe we should have helped her put away the groceries' 

'She likes to do all that by herself,’ Phoebe said. 

'Are you sure?’ 

'Of course, I'm sure,’ Phoebe said. Tve lived here my whole life, haven't I?' 

I asked Phoebe if her mother really had allergies 

'Well, gosh, Sal, if she says she does, then I guess she does. She’s not the 
sort of person to lie.’ 

'Maybe something is wrong. Maybe something is bothering her. 

'Don't you think she would say so then?' 

'Maybe she's afraid to,' I said. I wondered why it was so easy for me to see 
that Phoebe's mother was worried and miserable, but Phoebe couldn't see it - 
or if she could, she was ignoring it. Maybe she didn't want to notice. Maybe 
it was too frightening a thing. I started wondering if this was how it had been 
with my mother. Were there things I didn't notice? 

Phoebe sat quite straight in her chair and said, 'Sal. I can assure you that 
my mother would not be afraid to say if something is bothering her. What on 
earth would she have to be afraid of? We are not exactly a family of lunatics, 
you know.’ 

Later that afternoon, when Phoebe and I went downstairs, Mrs. 
Winterbottom was talking with Prudence. 'Do you think I lead a tiny life?' 
she was asking. 


'Sugar, you're not rotten,' he said. 


'See?' she said. 'See? Why couldn't you at least believe I am rotten?' 

'Because you're not,' he said. 

She said she had to leave in order to clear her head, and to clear her heart 
of all the bad things She needed to learn about what she was 

'You can do that here, Sugar,' he said. 

'I need to do it on my own,' she said. 'I can't think. All I see here is what I 
am not. I am not brave. I am not good. And I wish someone would call me 
by my real name. My name isn't Sugar. It's Chanhassen.' 

She had not been well. She had had some terrible shocks, it is true, but I 
did not understand why she could not get better with us. I begged her to take 
me with her, but she said I could not miss school and my father needed me 
and, besides, she had to go alone. She had to. 

I thought she might change her mind, or at least tell me when she was 
leaving. But, she did neither of those things. She left me a letter which 
explained that if she said goodbye, it would be too terribly painful and it 
would sound too permanent. She wanted me to know that she would think of 
me every minute and that she would be back before the tulips bloomed. 

But, of course, she was not back before the tulips bloomed. 

It nearly killed my father after she left, I know it, but he continued doing 
everything just as before, whistling and humming and finding little gifts for 
people. He kept bringing home gifts for my mother and stacking them in a 
pile in their bedroom. 

On that night that he found out she wasn't coming back, he chipped away 
at the plaster wall and discovered the brick fireplace beneath. The next day 
he flew to Lewiston, Idaho, and when he came back, he did nothing for three 
days but chip and chip until every last piece of plaster was removed from 
that fireplace and every brick was scrubbed. Some of the cement grouting 



had to be replaced and I saw that he had written her name in tiny letters in 
the new cement. He wrote Chanhassen, not Sugar. 


Three weeks later he put the farm up for sale. By this time, he was 
receiving letters from Mrs. Cadaver, and I knew that he was answering her 
letters Then he drove up to see Mrs. Cadaver while I stayed with Gram and 
Gramps When he came back, he said we were moving to Euclid. Mrs. 
Cadaver had helped him find a job. 

I didn't even wonder how he had met her or how long he had known her. I 
ignored her whole existence. Besides, I was too busy throwing the most 
colossal temper tantrums I refused to move. I would not leave our farm, our 
maple tree, our swimming hole, our pigs, our chickens, our hayloft. I would 
not leave the place, which belonged to me. I would not leave the place to 
which, I was convinced, my mother might return. 

At first, my father did not argue with me. He let me behave like a wild 
boar. At last, he took down the For Sale sign and put up a For Rent sign. He 
said he would rent out the farm, hire someone to care for the animals and the 
crops, and rent a house for us in Euclid. The farm would still belong to us 
and one day we could return to it. 'But now,' he said. 'We have to leave 
because your mother is haunting me day and night. She's in the fields, the 
air, the bam, the walls, the trees.’ He said we were making this move to leam 
about bravery and courage. That sounded awfully familiar. 

In the end, I think, I merely ran out of steam. I stopped throwing tantrums. 

I didn't help pack but, when the time came, I climbed in the car and joined 
my father for our move to Euclid. I did not feel brave, and I did not feel 
courageous. 

When I told my story of Phoebe to Gram and Gramps, I mentioned none of 
this. They knew it already. They knew my father was a good man, they knew 
I did not want to leave the farm, they knew my father felt we had to leave. 
They also knew that my father had tried, many times, to explain to me about 
Margaret, but I wouldn't hear it. 

On that long day when my father and I left the farm behind and drove to 
Euclid, I wished that my father were not such a good man, for if he were not, 
then there would be someone else to blame for my mother's leaving. I didn't 
want to blame her. She was my mother, and she was part of me. 



19. Fish in the Air 


Gram said, 'Where did we leave off with Peeby? What was happening?’ 

'What’s the matter, gooseberry?’ Gramps said. 'Did that snake bite your 
brains?’ 

’No,’ she said. 'It did not bite my brains I was just trying to refresh my 
memory. 

’Let’s see,’ Gramps said. 'Mr. Birkway and Mrs. Cadaver were whacking a 
rhododendron, and they put it over the dead body, and then Peeby’s mother 
burned the brownies—’ 

Gram said, 'and Peeby and her sister were acting like spoiled chitlins, and 
they got another message: "In the course of a lifetime, what does it matter?" 
I like that message. 

Gramps said, 'And didn't Peeby want you to tell your daddy about Mrs. 
Cadaver and Mr. Birkway hacking up her husband?' 

Yes, that is what Phoebe wanted, and it is what I tried to do. One Sunday, 
when my father was looking through the photo albums, I asked him if he 
knew much about Mrs. Cadaver. He looked up quickly. ’You're ready to talk 
about Margaret?' he said. 

’Well, there were a few things I wanted to mention—’ 

'I’ve been wanting to explain—' he said. 

I plunged on. I didn’t want him to explain. I wanted to warn him. 'Phoebe 
and I saw her slashing and hacking away at the bushes in her back yard.’ 

'Is there something wrong with that?' he asked. 

I tried another approach. 'Her voice is like dead leaves blowing around, 
and her hair is spooky. 


'I see,' he said. 


'And, there is a man who visits her — 


'Sal, that sounds like spying.’ 

And, I don't think we should go over there any more.' 

Dad took off his glasses and rubbed them on his shirt for about five 
minutes. Then, he said, ’Sal, you're trying to catch fish in the air. Your 
mother is not coming back.’ 

It looked like I was merely jealous of Mrs. Cadaver. In the calm light of 
my father, all those things that Phoebe had said about Mrs. Cadaver seemed 
foolish. 

'I'd like to explain about her,’ my father said. 

'Oh, never mind. Just forget I mentioned her. I don't need any explanations' 

Later, when I was doing my homework, I found myself doodling in the 
margin of my English book. I had drawn a figure of a woman with wild hair 
and evil eyes and a rope around her neck. I drew a tree, fastened the rope to 
it, and hung her. 

The next day at school, I studied Mr. Birkway as he leaped and cavorted 
about the classroom. If he was a murderer, he certainly was a lively one. I 
had always pictured murderers as being mopey and sullen. I hoped Mr. 
Birkway was in love with Margaret Cadaver and would marry her and take 
her away so that my father and I could go back to Bybanks 

What I found most surprising about Mr. Birkway was that he increasingly 
reminded me of my mother - or. at least, of my mother before the sadness set 
in. There was a liveliness to both Mr. Birkway and my mother, and an 
excitement - a passion - for words and for stories 

That day, Mr. Birkway talked about Creek mythology and how exciting 
and thrilling it was going to be to have the opportunity to study a slew of 
wonderful Creek stories. When Mr. Birkway passed out the new books, he 
said, 'Don't you love the smell of a new book?' and, 'Treat them gently, 
gently.' and, 'What treasures lie within. 



In the midst of this, I started day-dreaming about my mother, who loved 
books almost as much as she loved all her outdoor treasures She liked to 
carry little books in her pocket and sometimes when we were out in the 
fields, she would flop down in the grass and start reading aloud. 

My mother especially liked Native American (she said 'Indian') stories. 

She knew legends from many tribes: Navaho, Sioux, Seneca, Net Perce, 
Maidu, Blackfoot, Huron. She knew about thunder gods, earth makers, wise 
crows, sly coyotes, and shadow souls Her favourite stories were those about 
people who came back, after death, as a bird or a river or a horse. She even 
knew one story about an old warrior who came back as a potato. 

The next thing I knew, Mr. Birkway was saying, 'Right Phoebe? Phoebe? 
Are you awake? You have the second report. 

’Report?’ Phoebe said. 

'Lucky you! We're letting you go second!' 

’Report?’ 

Mr. Birkway clutched his heart and said to the class, 'Apparently, Miss 
Phoebe Winterbottom did not hear me explain about the reports Perhaps you 
can enlighten her, Mr. Finney. 

Ben turned slowly around in his chair and cast his sparkling black eyes in 
Phoebe's direction. He said, 'I'm doing an oral report on Prometheus this 
Friday. You're doing one on Pandora next Monday.’ 

'Lucky me,’ Phoebe muttered. Mr. Birkway asked me to stay after class for 
a minute. Phoebe sent me warning messages with her eyebrows. As 
everyone else was leaving the room, Phoebe said, I'll stay with you if you 
want.' 

'Why?' 

'Because, Sal, because.’ 


'Because of what?’ I said. 



'Because of him hacking up Mr. Cadaver, that’s what. I don't think you 
should be alone with him.' 


He did not hack me up. Instead, he gave me a special assignment, a 'mini 
journal'. 

’I don't know what that is,’ I said. Phoebe was breathing on my shoulder. 
Mr. Birkway said I should write about something that interested me. 'Like 
what?’ I said. 

'Heavens!' he said. 'I don't know what interests you. Anything you like. 
Anything at all.' 

Phoebe said, 'Could she write about murderers?’ 

Mr. Birkway said, 'Goodness ! Is that something that interests you, Sal? Or 
is it something that interests you, Phoebe?’ 

’Oh, no, sir,' Phoebe said. 

'I think.' Mr. Birkway said, 'you should keep it more simple. Write about 
something you like - a place, a room, a person - don't worry about it too 
much. Just write whatever comes to mind.’ 

Phoebe and I walked home with Mary Lou and Ben. My brain was a mess, 
what with trying not to flinch whenever Ben brushed against me. When we 
left Ben and Mary Lou and turned the corner into Phoebe's street, I wasn't 
paying much attention. I suppose I was aware that someone was coming 
along the sidewalk in our direction, but it wasn't until the person was about 
three feet away that I really took notice. 

It was Phoebe's lunatic, coming toward us, staring right at us. He stopped 
directly in front of us, blocking our way. 

'Phoebe Winterbottom, right?' he said to Phoebe. Her voice was a little 
squeak. The only sound that came out was a tiny 'Erp... 

’What’s the matter, Phoebe Winterbottom?’ he said. He slid one hand into 
his pocket. 



Phoebe pushed him, yanked my arm, and started running. 'Oh - my - God!' 
she said. ’Oh - my - God!’ 

I was grateful that we were nearly at Phoebe's house, so if he stabbed us in 
broad daylight, maybe one of her neighbors would discover our bodies and 
take us to the hospital before we bled entirely to death. I was actually 
beginning to believe he was a lunatic. 

Phoebe tugged at her doorknob, but the door was locked. Phoebe beat on 
the door, and her mother suddenly pulled it open. 'Whatever is the matter?’ 
Mrs. Winterbottom said. She looked rather pale and shaken herself. 

’It was locked!’ Phoebe said. ’Why was the door locked?’ 

’Oh, sweetie,' Mrs. Winterbottom said. ’It’s just that - 1 thought that—’ She 
peered around us and looked up and down the street. 'Did you see someone, 
did someone frighten you—?’ 

’It was the lunatic,' Phoebe said. 'We saw him just now.' She could hardly 
catch her breath. ’Maybe we should call the police. Or tell Dad.’ 

I took a good long look at Phoebe's mother. She did not seem capable of 
phoning the police or Mr. Winterbottom. I think she was more scared than 
we were. She went around locking all the doors. 

Nothing more happened that evening and, by the time I went home, the 
lunatic did not seem quite so threatening. No one called the police, and, to 
my knowledge, Mrs. Winterbottom had not yet told Mr. Winterbottom. 
Right before I left Phoebe's house, Phoebe said to me, 'If I see the lunatic 
once more, I will phone the police myself 

20. The Blackberry Kiss 

That night, I tried to write the mini journal for Mr. Birkway. I had a 
terrible time coming up with some- thing to write about. First, I made a list 
of all the things I liked, and they were all things from Bybanks - the trees, 
the cows, the chickens, the pigs, the fields, the swimming hole. It was a 
complete jumble of things, and when I tried to write about any one of those 


things, I ended up writing about my mother, because everything was 
connected to her. At last, 1 wrote about the black- berry kiss. 

One morning, on the farm, when I awoke and looked out the window, I 
saw my mother walking up the hill to the barn. Mist hung about the ground, 
finches were singing in the oak tree beside the house, and there was my 
mother, her pregnant belly sticking out in front of her. She was strolling up 
the hill, swinging her arms and singing: 

Oh, don't fall in love with a sailor boy, 
a sailor boy, a sailor boy - 
Oh, don't fall in love with a sailor boy, 
cause he'll take your heart to sea - 

As she approached the corner of the barn where the sugar maple stands, 
she plucked a few blackberries from a stray bush and popped them into her 
mouth. She looked all around her - back at the house, across the fields, and 
up into the canopy of branches overhead. She took several quick steps up to 
the trunk of the maple, threw her arms around it, and kissed that tree 
soundly. 

Later that day, I examined this tree trunk. I tried to wrap my arms about it, 
but the trunk was much bigger than it had seemed from my window. I 
looked up at where her mouth must have touched the trunk. I probably 
imagined this, but I thought I could detect a small dark stain, as from a 
blackberry kiss 

I put my ear against the trunk and listened. I faced that tree squarely and 
kissed it firmly. To this day, I can smell the smell of the bark - a sweet, 
woody smell - and feel its ridges, and taste that distinctive taste on my lips 

In my mini journal, I confessed that I had since kissed all different kinds of 
trees, and each family of trees - oaks, maples, elms, birches - had a special 
flavour all of its own. Mixed in with each tree's own taste was the slight tang 
of blackberries, and why this was so, I could not explain. 

The next day, I turned in this story to Mr. Birkway. He didn't read it or 
even look at it, but he said, 'Marvelous! Brilliant!’ as he slipped it into his 
briefcase. Til put it with the other journals’ 



Phoebe said, 'Did you write about me?' 


Ben said, 'Did you write about me?' 

Mr. Birkway was bounding around the room as if the opportunity to teach 
us was his notion of paradise. He threw open the windows and sucked in the 
air. 'Ah, September,' he said. He pulled out a book and read a poem by e. e, 
cummings. The poem was titled 'the little horse is newly' and the reason why 
the only capital letter in the title is the 'Y' at the end of newlY' is because 
Mr. Cummings liked to do it that way. 

'He probably never took English,' Phoebe said. 

To me that 'Y' looked like the newly born horse standing up on his thin 
legs. 

The poem was about a newlY bom horse who doesn't know anything but 
feels everything. After that, I couldn't make a lot of sense out of anything 
except that this horse feels amazing and lives in a 'smooth beautifully folded' 
world. I liked that. I was not sure what it was, but I liked it. Everything 
sounded soft and safe. 

Thus far, it was not an unusual sort of day, purely normal as far as school 
goes. I started walking home alone, because Phoebe had left early for a 
dentist appointment. I was supposed to meet her at her house at five o'clock. 

I didn't even mind too much when Ben came running up behind me, because 
I was in a good mood and besides, I didn't really want to walk home by 
myself. 

I was completely unprepared for what happened on the way home, and of 
course for what happened later. Ben and I were simply walking along and he 
said, 'Did anyone ever read your palm?' 

'No. 

'I know how to do it,' he said. 'Want me to read yours?' We were passing a 
bus stop and there was a wooden bench on the sidewalk. Ben said, 'Come 
on, sit down. I can't do it while we're walking along.' He took my hand and 
stared at it for the longest time. His own hand was soft and warm. Mine was 
sweating like crazy. He was saying, 'Hmm' and tracing the lines of my palm 



with his finger. It gave me the shivers, but not in an entirely unpleasant way. 
The sun was beating down on us, and I thought it might be nice to sit there 
for ever with him just running his finger along my palm like that. I thought 
about the newlY born horse who knows nothing and feels everything. I 
thought about the smooth beautifully folded world. Finally, Ben said, 'Do 
you want the good news first or the bad news?’ 

'The bad news. It isn't real bad, is it?’ 

He coughed. ’The bad news is that I can't really read palms' 

I snatched my hand away, grabbed my books, and started walking away. 

'Don’t you want to know the good news?' he asked. 

I kept walking. 

'The good news is' he said, 'that you let me hold your hand for almost ten 
minutes and you didn't flinch once.' 

I didn't know quite what to make of him. He walked me all the way to my 
house, even though I refused to speak to him. He sat down on the porch. 'I 
can't invite you in,’ I said. 

’That’s OK,' he said. 'I'll wait.’ 

'For what?’ 

'Aren't you going to Phoebe's at five o'clock? I'll wait. You don't want to 
walk over there alone. I'll sit here and do my homework.’ He pulled out his 
mythology book. 

I went inside and walked around. I looked out the window. He was still 
there. ’Are you doing your mythology report?’ I asked. 'I guess I might as 
well sit out here and do mine, too.' 

He didn't say anything. In fact, neither of us said anything. He was reading 
his book and taking notes I tried to read mine, but it was difficult to think 
with him sitting there. I was relieved when it was time to go to Phoebe's. 



When we passed Mrs. Cadaver's house, someone called my name. I didn't 
see anyone at first, but then I spotted Mrs. Partridge sitting in a lawn chair 
beside the house. 


'Hello,' I said. 

'Who's that?’ Ben asked. 

'Mrs. Partridge. She's blind.' 

He gave me a queer look. ’Then, how did she know who you were?’ It was 
a good question, but I did not know how to answer it. When I knocked at 
Phoebe's door, Ben said,' I'll be going now. 

I took a quick look at him and turned back to the door, but in the instant 
that I was turning my head, he leaned forward, and I do believe his lips 
kissed my ear. I was not sure this was what he intended. In fact, I was not 
sure it happened at all because, before I knew it, he had hopped down the 
steps and was walking away. 

The door inched open and there was Phoebe's round face, as white and 
frightened as ever you could imagine. 'Quick,' she said. 'Come in.' She led 
me into the kitchen. On the kitchen table was an apple pie, and beside it 
were three envelopes: one for Phoebe, one for Prudence, and one for their 
father. 

'I opened my note,' Phoebe said, showing it to me. It said, keep all the 
doors locked and call your father if you need anything. I love you, Phoebe. 
It was signed, Mom. 

I didn't think too much of it. 'Phoebe—' I said. 

'I know, I know. It doesn't sound terrible or anything. In fact, my first 
thought was. 'Well good. She knows I am old enough to be here by myself." 
I figured she was out shopping or maybe she even decided to return to work, 
even though she wasn't supposed to go back to Rocky's Rubber until next 
week. But, then. Prudence came home and opened her note.' 



Phoebe showed me the note left for Prudence. It said, Please hear up the 
spaghetti sauce and boil the spaghetti. I love you, Prudence. It was signed, 
Mom. 


I still, didn't think too much of it. 'She's probably just working late,’ I said. 

'I don't know,’ Phoebe said. 'I don't like it. I don't like it one bit.' 

Prudence heated up the spaghetti sauce and boiled the spaghetti, while I 
helped Phoebe set the table. Phoebe and I even made a salad. 'I do feel sort 
of independent,’ Phoebe said. 

Phoebe's father came home. 'Where's Norma?' he said. Phoebe showed him 
his note. He opened it and sat down, staring at the piece of paper. Phoebe 
looked over his shoulder and read his note aloud: I had to go away. I can't 
explain. I'll call you in a few days. It was signed, Norma. 

I had a sinking, sinking feeling. 

Prudence started asking a million questions. 'What does she mean? Go 
away where? Why can't she explain? Why didn't she tell you? Did she 
mention this? A few days? Where did she go?’ 

'Maybe we should call the police,’ Phoebe said. 

'The police? What for?' Mr. Winterbottom said. 

'I think she was kidnapped or something. 

'Oh, Phoebe.' 

'I'm serious,’ she said. 'Maybe a lunatic came in the house and dragged her 
off- 

'Phoebe, that is not funny. 

'I'm not being funny. I mean it. It could happen.' Prudence was still asking 
questions. 'Where did she go? Why didn't she mention this? Didn't she tell 
you? Where did she go?' 



'Prudence, I honestly cannot say,' her father said. 


'I think we should call the police,’ Phoebe said again. 

’Phoebe, if she was kidnapped, would the lunatic - as you say - allow he; to 
sit down and write these notes? Mm?’ 


'He might— 


'Phoebe! That's enough.' He sat there staring at the note. Then he stood up, 
removed his coat, took off his tie and said, 'Let's eat.' It was only then that he 
seemed to notice I was there. 'Oh,' he said. He looked quite embarrassed. 'I'm 
sorry about all this, Sal—' 

'I have to go,' I said. 

At the door, Phoebe said, 'My mother has disappeared. Sal, don't tell 
anyone. Don't tell a soul.' 

At home, my father was slumped over the photo album. He used to close 
the album quickly when I came in the room, as if he were embarrassed to be 
caught with it. Lately, however, he didn't bother to close it. It was almost as 
if he didn't have the strength to do that. 

On the opened page was a photo of my father and mother sitting in the 
grass beneath the sugar maple. His arms were around her and she was sort of 
folded into him. His face was pressed up next to hers and their hair blended 
together. They looked like they were connected. 

'Phoebe's mother went away,' I said. 

He looked up at me. 

'She left some notes. She says she's coming back, but I don't believe it. 

I went upstairs and tried to work on my mythology report. My father came 
to the doorway and said. 'People usually come back. 

Now, I can see that he was just talking in general, just trying to be 
comforting, but, then - that night - 1 heard in what he said the tiniest 



reassurance of some- thing I had been thinking and hoping. I had been 
praying that a miracle would happen and my mother would come back and 
we would return to Bybanks and everything would be exactly as it used to 


be. 


21. Souls 

At school, the next day, Phoebe wore a fixed expression: a sealed, thin 
smile. It must have been difficult for her to maintain that smile, because by 
the time English class came around, her chin was quivering from the strain. 
She was extremely quiet all day. She didn't speak to anyone but me, and the 
only thing she said to me was, ’Stay at my house tomorrow night.’ It wasn't a 
question; it was a command. 

In English class, Mr. Birkway gave us a fifteen- second exercise. As fast as 
we could, without thinking, we were to draw something. He would tell us 
what we were to draw when everyone was ready. 'Remember,' he said. 'Don't 
think. Just draw. Fifteen seconds. Ready? Draw your soul. Go.' 

We all wasted five seconds staring blankly at him. When we saw that he 
was serious and was watching the clock, our pencils hit the paper. I wasn't 
thinking. There wasn't time to think. 

When Mr. Birkway called 'Stop!', everyone looked up with a dazed 
blankness. Then, we looked down at our papers A buzz went around the 
room. We were surprised at what had come out of our pencils. 

Mr. Birkway was already zipping around, scooping up the papers. He 
shuffled them and began tacking them up on the bulletin board. He said, 'We 
now have everyone's soul captured.' We all crowded around. 

The first thing I noticed was that every single person had drawn a central 
shape - a heart, circle, square, or triangle. I thought that was unusual. I mean, 
no one drew a bus or a spaceship or a cow - they all drew these same shapes. 
Next, I noticed that inside each figure was a distinct design. At first it 
seemed that no two people had drawn the same thing inside. There was a 
cross, a dark scribble, an eye, a mouth, a window. 


Inside Phoebe's was a teardrop. 


Then Mary Lou said, 'Look at that - two are exactly the same.’ People were 
saying, 'Geez' and, 'Wow' and, 'Whose are those?’ 

The duplicate designs were: a circle with a large maple leaf in the centre, 
the tips of the leaf touching the sides of the circle. 

One of the maple leaf circles was mine. The other was Ben’s. 

22. Evidence 

I spent the next night at Phoebe's house, but I could hardly sleep. Phoebe 
kept saying, ’Hear that noise?’ and she would jump up to peer out the 
window in case it was the lunatic returning for the rest of us once, she saw 
Mrs. Cadaver in her garden with a torch. 

I must have fallen asleep after that, because I awoke to the sound of 
Phoebe crying in her sleep. When I woke her, she denied it. 'I was not 
crying. I most certainly was not.’ In the morning, Phoebe refused to get up. 
Her father rushed into the room with two ties slung around his neck and his 
shoes in his hand. ’Phoebe, you're late.’ 

Tm sick,’ she said. ’I have a fever and a stomach ache.’ 

Her father placed his hand on her forehead, looked deep into her eyes and 
said, I'm afraid you have to go to school.' 

Tm sick. Honest,' she said. 'It might be cancer. 

'Phoebe, I know you're worried, but there's nothing we can do. We have to 
get on with things We can't malinger. 

'We can't what?' Phoebe said. 

'Malinger. Here. Look it up.' He tossed her the dictionary from her desk 
and tore down the hall. 

'My mother is missing, and my father hands me: a dictionary.' Phoebe said. 
She looked up 'malinger and read the definition: 'To pretend to be ill in order 
to escape duty or work.' She slammed the book shut. 'I am not malingering.' 


Prudence was running around in a frenzy. 'Where is my white blouse? 
Phoebe, have you seen...? I could have sworn...!- She was pulling things out 
of her closet and flinging them on the bed. 

Phoebe reluctantly got dressed, pulling a wrinkled blouse and skirt from 
the closet. Downstairs, the kitchen table was bare. ’No bowls of muesli,’ 
Phoebe said. 'No glasses of orange juice or whole wheat toast.’ She touched 
a white sweater hanging on the back of a chair. 'My mother's favourite white 
cardigan,' she said. She snatched the sweater and waved it in front of her 
father. 'Look at this! Would she leave this behind? Would she?' 

He reached forward and touched its sleeve, rubbing the fabric between his 
fingers for a moment. 'Phoebe, it's an old sweater.' Phoebe put it on over her 
wrinkled blouse. 

I was uneasy because everything that happened at Phoebe's that morning 
reminded me of when my mother left. For weeks, my father and I fumbled 
around like ducks in a fit. Nothing was where it was supposed to be. 'The 
house took on a life of its own, hatching piles of dishes and laundry and 
newspapers and dust. My father must have said, 'I'll be jiggered' about three 
thousand times The chickens were fidgety, the cows were skittish, and the 
pigs were sullen and glum. Our dog, Moody Blue, whimpered for hours on 
end. 

When my father said that my mother was not coming back. I refused to 
believe it. I brought all her postcards down from my room and said, 'Would 
she have written these if she was not coming back?' And, just like Phoebe, 
who had waved her mother's sweater in front of her father, I had brought a 
chicken in from the coop: 'Would Mom leave her favourite chicken?' I 
demanded. 'She loves this chicken.' 

What I really meant was, 'Would Mom leave me? She loves me.' 

At school, Phoebe slammed her books on her desk. Beth Ann said, 'Hey, 
Phoebe, your blouse is a little wrinkled.' 

'My mother's away,' Phoebe said. 


'I iron my own clothes now,' Beth Ann said. 'I even iron—' 



'My mother's gone,' Phoebe said. 

'I heard you, Phoebe. You can iron your own clothes, you know. To me, 
Phoebe whispered, 'I think I'm having a genuine heart attack.' 

I thought about a baby rabbit we once had. When my mother found it in 
the field, cuddled against its dead mother, she brought the rabbit down to the 
bam and we nursed it. I slept in the bam with it for a whole week. Then, one 
day, our dog, Moody Blue, caught the baby rabbit in its mouth. Moody Blue 
was only carrying it around - she was not actually lunching on the rabbit. I 
finally coaxed Moody Blue to drop it, and when I picked up the rabbit, its 
heart was beating faster than anything. Faster and faster it went, and then all 
of a sudden its heart stopped. 

I took the rabbit to my mother. She said. 'It's dead, Salamanca. 

'It can't be dead,' I said. 'It was alive just a minute ago.' 

Phoebe said, 'I'm going to the nurse. Come with me. Please?' In the nurse's 
office, Phoebe explained that she was having a heart attack. The nurse told 
Phoebe to lie down. Five minutes later the nurse took Phoebe's pulse, said 
the heart attack had probably subsided, and sent both of us on to class. I 
wondered what would happen if all of a sudden Phoebe's heart beat itself out 
like the rabbit's, and she fell down and died right there at school. Her mother 
would not even know Phoebe was dead. 

Later, Mary Lou said to Phoebe, 'Beth Ann mentioned something about 
your mother being away...?' 

Christy and Megan gathered around. 'Is your mother on a business trip?' 
Christy said. 'My mother's always going to Paris on business trips my 
mother's a journalist, you know.' 

Megan smiled. 'My father travels all the time. He just got back from 
Tokyo. If was a very important meeting, I can assure you. Next week he is 
going to Saudi Arabia. He's building an airport there.' 

Christy said, 'So where is your mother? On a business trip?' 


Phoebe nodded. 



'Where did she go?' Megan said. ’Tokyo? Saudi Arabia?’ 


Phoebe said, 'London.' 

'Oh, London,' Christy said. 'My mother's been there lots of times' 

'My father goes there regularly,’ Megan said. 

'Did she send any postcards yet'." Christy asked. 'My mother sends the 
most humorous postcards. Some have pictures of people with blue hair— 

'Oh,' Megan said, ’my father sent me one of those. 

Phoebe turned to me with a puzzled expression on her face. I think that she 
was surprised at what she had said, but I knew exactly why she had lied. It 
was easier sometimes. I had done this myself when people asked about my 
mother. 'Don't worry, Phoebe,' I said. 

She snapped, 'I am not worried.' 

I had done that, too. Whenever anyone tried to console me about my 
mother, I had nearly bitten their heads off. I was a complete ornery old 
donkey. When my father would say, 'You must feel terrible,' I denied it. 'I 
don’t,' I told him. 'I don't feel anything at all.' But I did feel terrible. I didn't 
want to wake up in the morning, and I was afraid to go to sleep at night.. 

By lunchtime, people were coming at Phoebe in all directions. 'How long 
will your mother be in London?' Mary Lou asked. 'Is she having tea with the 
Queen?' 

'Tell her to go to Convent Garden,' Christy said. 'My mother just loves 
Convent Garden.' 

'It’s Covent Garden, cabbage-head,' Mary Lou said. 'It isn't,' Christy said. 
'I'm sure it's Convent Garden. 

By the time we reached English class, even Mr. Birkway had heard the 
news. 'I hear your mother's in London, Phoebe,' he said. 'London, ah, 

London - the Globe Theatre, Shakespeare, Dickens, ah... 



After school, we walked home with Ben and Mary Lou. Phoebe wouldn't 
say a word. 'Whatsa matter. Free Bee?' Ben asked. ’Talk.' 

Out of the blue. I said. 'Everyone has his own agenda.' Ben tripped over 
the kerb, and Mary Lou gave me a peculiar look. I kept hoping that Phoebe's 
mother would be home. Even though the door was locked, I kept hoping. 
'Are you sure you want me to come in?’ I said. Maybe you want to be alone.’ 

Phoebe said, 'I don 't want to be alone. Call your dad and see if you can 
stay for dinner again. 

Inside, Phoebe called, 'Mom?' She walked through the house, looking in 
each room. 'That's it,' Phoebe said.' I'm going to search for clues, for 
evidence that the lunatic has been here and dragged my mother off.’ She was 
really getting carried away. I wanted to tell her that she was just fishing in 
the air and that probably her mother had not been kidnapped, but I could see 
that Phoebe didn't want to hear it. 

When my mother did not return, I imagined all sorts of things Maybe she 
had cancer and didn't want to tell us and was hiding in Idaho. Maybe she got 
knocked on the head and had amnesia and was wandering around Lewiston, 
not knowing who she really was, or thinking she was someone else. My 
father would say, 'She does not have cancer, Sal. She does not have amnesia. 
'Those are fishes in the air.' But I didn't believe him. Maybe he was trying to 
protect her - or me. 

Phoebe prowled through the house, examining the walls and carpet, 
searching for blood stains She found several suspicious spots and 
unidentifiable hair strands Phoebe marked the spots with pieces of adhesive 
tape and collected the hairs in an envelope. 

Prudence was in a lather when she came home. 'I made it!' she said. 'I 
made it!' She was jumping all about. 'I made cheerleading!' When Phoebe 
reminded her that their mother had been kidnapped. Prudence said, 'Oh, 
Phoebe. Mom wasn't kidnapped.’ She stopped jumping and looked around 
the kitchen. 'So, what are we supposed to have for dinner?’ 


Phoebe rummaged around in the cupboards. Prudence opened the freezer 
compartment and said, ’Look at this.’ For a terrible moment, I thought 



perhaps she had found some chopped-up body parts in there. Maybe, just 
maybe. Phoebe was right. Maybe a lunatic had done away with her mother. I 
couldn't look. I could hear Prudence moving things about in the freezer. At 
least she wasn't screaming. 

There were no body parts in the freezer. Instead, stacked neatly, were 
plastic containers each with a little note attached. 'Broc-len Gas, 350, 1 hr,’ 
Prudence read, and 'Veg Spa& 325, 30 min.' and 'Mac Che, 325, 45 min,’ on 
and on and on. 

'What’s Broc-Len Cas?’ 1 said. 

Phoebe pried open the lid. Inside was a green and yellow hardened mass. 
'Broccoli and lentil casserole,’ she said. 

When their father came home, he seemed surprised to see dinner on the 
table. Prudence showed him the freezer contents. 'Hm,' he said. At dinner, 
we all ate rather quietly. 

'I don't suppose you've heard anything - from Mom?' Prudence asked her 
father. 

'Not yet,' he said. 

'I think we should call the police,’ Phoebe said. 'Phoebe. 

Tm serious. I found some suspicious spots.' Phoebe pointed toward two 
adhesive-taped areas beneath the dining-room table. 

'What's that tape doing down there?' he asked. 

Phoebe explained about the potential blood spots 

'Blood?' Prudence said. She stopped eating. 

Phoebe pulled out the envelope and emptied the hair strands on the table 
.’Strange hairs' Phoebe explained. 


Prudence said. 'Uck. 



Mr. Winterbottom tapped his fork against his knife. Then he stood up, took 
Phoebe's arm, and said, ’Follow me.’ He went to the refrigerator, opened the 
freezer compartment, and indicated the plastic containers 'If your mother had 
been kidnapped by a lunatic, would she have had time to prepare all these 
meals? Would she have been able to say, "Excuse me, Mr. Lunatic, while I 
prepare ten or twenty meals for my family to eat while I am kidnapped"?' 

'You don't care,' Phoebe said. 'Nobody cares. Everyone has his own idiot 
agenda.' 

I left shortly after dinner. Mr. Winterbottom was in his study, phoning his 
wife's friends to see if they had any idea of where she might have gone. 

'At least,' Phoebe said to me, 'he's taking some action, but I still think 
someone should call the police.' 

As I left Phoebe's the dead leaf crackly voice of Margaret Cadaver called 
to me from her house next door. 'Sal? Sal?' I stopped, but I did not go up the 
walk. 'Do you want to come in?' she said. 

'I have to go home.' 

'But, your father's here - we're having dessert. Won't you join us?' 

My father appeared behind her. 'Come on, Sal,' he said. 'Don't be a goose.' 
'I am not a goose,' I said. 'I already had dessert, and I'm going home to work 
on my English report.' 

My father turned to Margaret. 'I'd better go with her. Sorry—' 

Margaret didn't say anything. She just stood there as my father retrieved 
his jacket and joined me. Dad and I walked home together. I knew it was 
mean, but I felt as if I had won a little victory over Margaret Cadaver. On 
the way home, Dad asked if Phoebe's mother had come back yet. 

'No.' I said. 'Phoebe thinks a lunatic has carried her off.' 


'A lunatic? Isn't that a bit far-fetched?' 



'That's what I thought at first, but you never know, do you? I mean it could 
happen. 'There could actually be a lunatic who—' 

'Sal.' 

I was going to explain about the nervous young man and the mysterious 
messages, but my father would call me a goose. Instead, I said, 'How do you 
know that someone - not exactly a lunatic, but just someone - didn't make 
Mom go to Idaho? Maybe it was black- mail—' 

'Sal. Your mother went because she wanted to go.' 

'We should have stopped her.' 

'A person isn't a bird. You can't cage a person.' 

'She shouldn't have gone. If she hadn't gone— 

'Sal, I'm sure she intended to come back.' We had reached our house, but 
we didn't go in. We sat on the porch steps. Dad said, 'You can't predict - a 
person can't foresee - you never know—' 

He looked away, and I felt miserable right along with him. I apologized for 
being ornery and for upsetting him. He put his arm around me and we sat 
there together on the porch, two people being completely pitiful and lost. 

23. The Badlands 

Gramps said, 'How's your snake leg, gooseberry?' I could tell he was 
worried about Gram, but less about her leg than her breathing, which was 
still raspy. 'We'll stop in the Badlands, OK, gooseberry?' Gram merely 
nodded. She didn't even scold him for calling her a gooseberry. 

The closer we got to the Badlands the more wicked were the whispers in 
the air: Slow down, slow, slow, slow. 'Maybe we shouldn't go to the 
Badlands' I suggested. 

'What? Not go? Of course we should go,' Gramps said. 'We're almost 
there. It's a national treasure.' 


All along the road into the Badlands were signs for Wall Drug, a famous 
drug store in Wall, South Dakota. 'Don't Miss Spectacular World Famous 
Wall Drug!’ and a little further on, 'Seventy Miles to Wall Drug!' and ten 
miles later, ’Sixty Miles to Wall Drug!’ 

'What is this gol-dang Wall Drug?’ Gramps asked. 'I'd sure like to know 
what is so gol-dang spectacular about a drug store.' 

My mother must have traveled on this road and seen these same signs. 
What was she thinking about when she saw that sign? Or that one? When 
she reached this spot in the road? 

My mother did not drive. She was terrified of cars. 'I don't like all that 
speed.' she said. 'I like to be in control of where I am going and how fast I 
am going.' 

When she said she was going all the way to Lewiston, Idaho, my father 
and I were astonished. 

'How are you going to get there?’ my father asked. 

'On a bus’ 

'A bus all the way across the country?’ 

'Yes’ she said. 

26. Sacrifices 


The weekend was extensively long. Phoebe arrived with her suitcase on 
Saturday morning. I said, 'Golly, Phoebe, are you planning to spend a month 
here?' She stepped inside and looked around. Our house is exactly like hers, 
except that ours has more furniture crammed into it. This is because our 
Bybanks house was big and rambling and needed big and rambling things to 
fill it up. Most of our furniture once belonged to my grandparents or to other 
relatives People in Bybanks pass things around when they get tired of them. 

When I took Phoebe up to my room, she asked if she was going to be 
sharing this room with me. 'Why, no Phoebe,' I said. 'We built a whole new 
extension just for you.’ 

'You don't have to be sarcastic,’ she said. 

'I was only teasing, Phoebe.' 

'But, there’s only one bed.’ 

'Good powers of observation, Phoebe.’ 

'I thought you might sleep downstairs on the couch. People usually try to 
make their guests comfortable.' She looked around my room. 'We're going to 
be a little crowded in here, aren't we?’ 

I did not answer. I did not bash her over the head. I knew why she was 
acting this way. She sat down on my bed and bounced on it a couple of 
times. 'I guess I'll have to get used to your lumpy mattress Mine is very firm. 
A firm mattress is much better for your back. That’s why I have such good 
posture. The reason you slouch is probably because of this mattress.’ 

'Slouch?' I said. 

'Well, you do slouch, Sal. Look in the mirror sometime.’ She mashed on 
my mattress 'Don’t you know anything about having guests? You're 
supposed to give your guests the best that you have. You're supposed to 
make some sacrifices, Sal. That's what my mother always says. She says "In 
life, you have to make some sacrifices.'" 



'I suppose your mother made a great sacrifice when she took off,’ I said. I 
couldn't help it. She was really getting on my nerves 


’My mother didn't "take off". Someone kidnapped her. She is undergoing 
tremendous sacrifice at this very moment in time.’ She started unpacking. 
'Where shall I put my things?’ When I opened up the closet, she said, 'What a 
mess! Do you have some extra hangers?’ 

’There aren't any extra hangers.' 

'Well, where should I put my things? Am I supposed to leave them 
jammed up in the suitcase all weekend? A guest is supposed to have the best. 
It is only courtesy, Sal. My mother says—' 

'I know, I know - sacrifice.' 

Later, as I sat at my desk, flipping through a book, she sighed loudly. 'I 
guess I'll work on my Pandora report, as long as you're going to be doing 
homework while I'm visiting.' she said. 'I don't suppose you have another 
desk?’ 

I got up, looked under my bed, peered in the closet, examined the ceiling, 
and said. 'Nope. No more desks.’ 

’You don't have to be sarcastic.’ She plopped down on the bed with her 
books and paper. 'I suppose I can do my homework here, although it isn't 
good for my back.' Ten minutes later, Phoebe mentioned that she was getting 
a headache. 'It might even be a migraine. My aunt's foot doctor used to get 
migraines, only they turned out not to be migraines at all. Do you know what 
they were?’ 

’What?’ I said. 

’A brain tumour.’ 

’Really?’ I said. 

'Yes' Phoebe said. 'In her brain.' 



'Well, of course, it would be in her brain, Phoebe. I figured that out when 
you said it was a brain tumour. 

'I do not think that is a particularly sympathetic way to speak to someone 
with a migraine or a potential brain tumour. 

In my book was a picture of a tree. I drew a round head with curly hair, put 
a rope around the neck, and attached it to that tree. 

It went on and on like that. I hated her that day. I didn't care how upset she 
was about her mother, I really hated her, and I wanted her to leave. I 
wondered if this was how my father felt when I threw all those temper 
tantrums. Maybe he hated me for a while. 

After dinner, we walked over to Mary Lou’s Mr. and Mrs. Finney were 
rolling around on the front lawn in a pile of leaves with Tommy and Dougie, 
and Ben was sitting on the porch. I sat down beside him while Phoebe went 
looking for Mary Lou. 

Ben said, 'Phoebe's driving you crazy, isn’t she?’ I liked the way he looked 
right in your eyes when he talked to you. 

'Extensively.' I said. 

'Her mother isn't really in London, is she?’ 

'What makes you say that?’ 

He looked a bit sad. 'I don't know. I expect Phoebe is just feeling lonely. 

I don't know what came over me, but I almost reached up and touched his 
face. My heart was thumping so loudly that I thought he would be able to 
hear it. I went into the house. From there, I could see out the back window. 
Mrs. Finney had gone around the back and was climbing a ladder placed 
against the garage. On the roof she took off her jacket and spread it out. A 
few minutes later, Mr. Finney came around the back of the house and 
climbed up the ladder. He took off his jacket and spread it out next to her. 

He lay down on the roof and put his arm around her. He kissed her. 



On the roof in the wide-open air, they lay there kissing each other. It made 
me feel peculiar. They reminded me of my parents, before the stillborn baby, 
before the operation. 

Ben came into the kitchen. As he reached into the cupboard for a glass, he 
stopped and looked at me. Again I had that odd sensation that I wanted to 
touch his face, right there on his cheek, in that soft spot. I was afraid my 
hand might just lift up and drift over to him if I was not careful. It was most 
peculiar. 

'Guess where Mary Lou is?’ Phoebe said when she came in. 'She's with 
Alex. On a date.' 

'That's nice,' I said. I had never been on a date. Neither, I assumed, had 
Phoebe. 

That night at my house, I pulled the sleeping bag out of the closet and 
spread it on the floor. Phoebe looked at it as if it were a spider. 'Don't worry,' 
I said, 'I'll sleep in it.' I crawled in and pretended to fall asleep immediately. 

I heard Phoebe get into bed. 

A little later, my father came into the room. 'Phoebe?' he said. 'Is 
something the matter?' 

'No,' she said. 

'I thought I heard someone crying. Are you OK?' 

'Yes' she said. 

'Are you sure?' 

'Yes' 

I felt bad for Phoebe. I knew I should get up and try to be nice, but I 
remembered when I had felt like that, and I knew that sometimes you just 
wanted to be alone with the birds of sadness. Sometimes you had to cry by 
yourself. 



That night, I dreamed that I was sitting on the grass peering through a pair 
of binoculars. Far off in the distance, my mother was climbing up a ladder. 
She kept climbing and climbing. It was a thumpingly tall ladder. She 
couldn't see me, and she never came down. She just kept on going. 

27. The Phone Call 

The next day I helped Phoebe lug her suitcase home. We had spent most of 
the day doing our homework, so we did not argue too much. On the way to 
her house, I said, 'Phoebe, I know you've been upset lately—' 

'I have not been upset lately,' she said. 

'Sometimes, Phoebe, I like you a lot- 

'Why, thank you.' 

'But, sometimes, Phoebe, I'll have to admit, I feel like lugging your 
cholesterol-free body straight across the room and dumping you right out the 
window.' 

She did not have a chance to respond, because we were at her house, and 
she was more interested in besieging her father with Questions. 'Any news? 
Did Mom come back? Did she call?' 

'Sort of he said. 

'Sort of? Sort of which? Is she here?' 

'She phoned Mrs. Cadaver—' 

'Mrs. Cadaver? Whatever for? Why didn't she call us? Why would she- 

'Phoebe, calm down. I don't know why she phoned Mrs. Cadaver. I haven't 
been able to speak to Mrs. Cadaver myself yet. She isn't home. She left a 
note here.' He showed it to Phoebe. 

The note said, Norma called to say she is OK. Beneath Mrs. Cadaver's 
signature was a p.s. saying that Mrs. Cadaver would be away until Monday. 


'I don't believe that Mom called Mrs. Cadaver. Mrs. Cadaver is making it 
up. She probably killed her and chopped her up and buried her under the- 

'Phoebe Winterbottom— ' 

Tm calling the police.’ Phoebe said. 

They had a huge argument, but at last Phoebe fizzled out. Her father said 
he had been calling everyone he could think of to see if her mother had 
indicated where she might be going. He would continue calling tomorrow, 
he promised, and he would speak with Mrs. Cadaver first thing on Monday. 
If he did not receive a letter - or a direct phone call - from her mother by 
Wednesday, he would call the police. 

Phoebe came out on the porch with me as I was leaving. She said, 'I've 
made a decision. I am going to call the police myself, I might even go 
directly to the police station. I don't have to wait until Wednesday. I can go 
whenever I want.’ 

That night she phoned me. She was whispering again. She said, 'It seems 
ever so quiet here. I don't know what is the matter with me. I was lying on 
my bed and I can’t sleep. My bed's too hard.’ 

28. Pandora's Box 

On Monday, the day that Phoebe was supposed to give her oral report on 
Pandora, she was a wreck. When Mr. Birkway bounded into the room, 
Phoebe said that her heart was hurting and asked if she could see the nurse. 
Mr. Birkway said, 'Why don't you get started with your report, and if you 
still don’t feel well in a few minutes, you can stop and go to the nurse. 

Tm not malingering,' she said. 

'Malingering! What a magnificent word!' Mr. Birkway said. 

Phoebe was afraid of Mr. Birkway. She was completely convinced that he 
was a murderer. Her hands shook as she picked up her notes and walked to 
the front of the room. She looked around. Beth Ann was filing her nails, and 
Mary Lou was smiling at Alex. Ben was busy drawing his cartoons and 


passing them to anyone who would take them. Several people were yawning. 
It was not the ideal audience. 

Phoebe began in a quivering voice. 'For some reason, Ben already talked 
about my topic, Pandora, when he did his report on Prometheus.' She 
seemed relieved that Prometheus came out correctly, and not as porpoises. 
'Flowever, Ben made a few little mistakes about Pandora. 

Everyone turned around to stare at Ben. 'I did not,' he said. 

'Yes you did.’ Phoebe said. Her lip trembled. 'As I was saying, Ben made a 
few tiny, little mistakes about Pandora. Pandora was not sent to Man as a 
punishment, but as a reward—’ 

'Was not,’ Ben said. 

'Was too,’ Phoebe said. 

Mr. Birkway said, ’Phoebe, if you please ...?’ 

'As I was saying,’ Phoebe continued, 'Zeus decided to give Man a lovely 
present, since Man seemed a little lonely down there on Earth, with only the 
animals to keep him company. So, Zeus made a sweet and beautiful woman, 
and then he invited all the gods to dinner. It was a very civilized dinner, with 
matching plates.’ 

Mary Lou and Ben exchanged an eyebrow message. 

'At this civilized dinner, Zeus asked the gods to give the beautiful woman 
presents - to make her feel like a welcome guest.’ Phoebe glanced at me. 
'They gave her all kinds of wonderful things: a fancy shawl, a silver dress, 
beauty— 

Ben interrupted. 'I thought you said she was already beautiful.' 

'I know. They gave her more beauty. Are you satisfied?' Her lip was no 
longer trembling. Now she was blushing. ’The gods also gave her the ability 
to sing, the power of persuasion, a gold crown, flowers and many truly 
wonderful things such as that. Because of all these gifts, Zeus named her 
Pandora, which means "the gift of all".’ 



Her heart attack was apparently subsiding. She was getting into it. 'There 
were two other gifts that I have not mentioned yet. One of them was 
curiosity. That is why all women are curious, by the way, because it was a 
gift given to the very first woman. 

Ben said. 'I wish she had been given the gift of silence. 

’As I was saying,' Phoebe continued, 'Pandora was given curiosity. ?here 
was one more gift, too, and that was a beautiful box, covered in gold and 
jewels, but - and this is very important - she was forbidden to open the box.' 

Ben said, 'Then, why did they give it to her?' 

He was beginning to irritate Phoebe, you could tell. She said, 'That's what 
I'm telling you. It was a present. 

'But, why did they give her a present that she couldn't open?' 

Phoebe looked puzzled. 'I don't know. It's just in the story. As I was 
saying, Pandora was not supposed to open the box, but because she had been 
given ever so much curiosity, she really, really, really wanted to know what 
was inside, so one day she opened the box.' 

'I knew it,' Ben said. 'I knew she was going to open the box the minute that 
you said she was not supposed to open it.' 

Misako raised her hand. 

Phoebe sighed. 'Do you have a question?' 

'What is in the box?' 

'As I was about to say, before Ben interrupted me, inside the box were all 
the evils in the world.' 

'What is evils?' Shigeru asked. 


'As I was about to explain, inside the box were all the evils of the world 
such as hatred, envy, plagues, sickness, cholesterol... 



Mr. Birkway scratched his head. He looked as if he might interrupt, but he 
didn't. 


Phoebe continued. 'There were brain tumours and sadness There were 
lunatics and kidnapping and murders ...' She glanced at Mr. Birkway before 
rushing on, ’...and all that kind of thing. Pandora tried to close the lid, she 
really tried when she saw all the horrible things that were coming out of it, 
but she could not get it closed in time, and that is why there are all these 
evils in the world. There was only one good thing in the box.’ 

'What was it?’ Ben asked. 

'As I was about to explain, the only good thing in the box was Hope.' 

'What is Hope?’ Shigeru said. 

'Hope?' Phoebe said. 'Hm. Hope is... hope. It’s hoping that... hmm. Hope is 
a little hard to explain.' 

'Try,' said Mr. Birkway. 

Everyone was staring at Phoebe. 'It is a feeling that - a wish that - 
something good might happen, and that is why, even though there are many 
evils in the world, there is still a little hope.' She held up a picture she had 
copied from a book. It was a picture of Pandora opening up the box and a 
whole shebang of gremlins floating out. Pandora looked extensively 
frightened. 

On the way home, I said, 'You must have been nervous’ 

'About what?’ Phoebe said. 

'About the report, Phoebe. Golly!’ 

'Oh, no,’ she said. 'I wasn't at all nervous.’ 

'That night I kept thinking about Pandora's box. I wondered why someone 
would put a good thing such as Hope in a box with sickness and kidnapping 
and murder. It was fortunate that it was there, though, if not, people would 



have the birds of sadness nesting in their hair all the time, because of nuclear 
war and the greenhouse effect and bombs and stabbings and lunatics. 

There must have been another box with all the good things in it, like 
sunshine and love and trees and all that. Who had the good fortune to open 
that one, and was there one bad thing down there in the bottom of the 'good' 
box? Maybe it was Worry. Even when everything seems fine and good, I 
worry that something will go wrong and change everything. 

My mother, my father and I all seemed fine and happy at our house until 
the baby died. Could you actually say that the baby died, since it had never 
breathed? Did its birth and death occur at the same moment? Could you die 
before you were born? 

Phoebe's family had not seemed fine, even before the arrival of the lunatic 
and the messages, and the disappearance of Mrs. Winterbottom. I knew that 
Phoebe was convinced that her mother was kidnapped because it was 
impossible for Phoebe to imagine that her mother could leave for any other 
reason. I wanted to call Phoebe and suggest that maybe her mother had gone 
looking for something, maybe her mother was unhappy, maybe there was 
nothing Phoebe could do about it. 

When I told this part to Gram and Gramps, Gramps said, 'You mean it had 
nothing to do with Peeby?’ 

'Right,' I said. 'What Phoebe didn't know was that it had nothing 
whatsoever to do with Phoebe.' 

Gram and Gramps looked at each other. They didn't say anything, but 
there was something in that look that suggested I had just said something 
important. For the first time, it occurred to me that maybe my mother's 
leaving had nothing whatsoever to do with me. It was separate and apart. We 
couldn't own our mothers. 

On that night, after Phoebe had given her Pandora report, I thought about 
the Hope in Pandora's box. Maybe when everything seemed sad and 
miserable. Phoebe and I could both hope that something might start to go 
right. 


29. The Black Hills 


When we saw the first sign for the Black Hills, the whispers changed. No 
longer were they saying, slow, slow, slow. Once again, they commanded, 
rush, hurry, rush. We had spent too long in South Dakota. There were only 
two days left and we still had a long way to go. 

'Maybe we should skip the Black Hills,’ I said. 

'What?' Gramps said. 'Skip the Black Hills? Skip Mount Rushmore? We 
can't do that.' 

'But today's the eighteenth. It’s the fifth day.' 

'Do we have a deadline someone didn't tell me about?’ Gramps asked. 
'Heck, we've got all the time in the—’ Gram gave him a look. 'I've just gotta 
see these Black Hills,' Gramps said. ’We'll be quick about it, chickabiddy.’ 

The whispers walloped me: rush, rush, rush. I knew we wouldn't make it to 
Idaho in time. I thought about sneaking off while Gram and Gramps were 
looking at the Black Hills Maybe I could hitch a ride with some- one who 
drove extensively fast, but the thought of someone speeding, careening 
around curves especially the snaking curves down into Lewiston, Idaho, 
which I had heard so much about - when I thought about that, it made me 
dizzy and sick. 

Heck,’ Gramps said, 'I oughta turn this wheel over to you, chickabiddy. 

All this driving is making me crazy as a loon. 

He was only joking, but he knew I could drive. He had taught me to drive 
his old pick-up truck when I was eleven. He and I used to ride around on the 
dirt roads on their farm. I drove, and he smoked his pipe and told stories. He 
said, 'You're a helluva driver, chickabiddy, but don't you tell your Momma I 
taught you. She'd thrash me half to death. 

I used to love to drive that old green pick-up truck. I dreamed about 
turning sixteen and getting my license, but then when Momma left, 
something happened to me. I became afraid of things I had never been afraid 
of before, and driving was one of these things I didn't even like to ride in 
cars, let alone drive the truck. 



The Black Hills were not really black. Pines covered the hills, and maybe 
at dusk they looked black, but when we saw them at mid-day, they were 
dark green. It was an eerie sight, all those rolling dark hills A cool wind 
blew down through the pines, and the trees swished secrets among them. 

My mother had always wanted to see the Black Hills. It was one of the 
sights she was most looking forward to on her trip. She knew all about the 
Sioux Indians and used to tell me about the Black Hills, which were sacred 
to them. It was their Holy Land, but white settlers took it as their own. The 
Sioux are still fighting for their land. I half-expected a Sioux to come riding 
down on horseback and stop our car from entering, and the thing is, I would 
have been on his side. I would have said, 'Take it. It's yours' 

It's mostly spoiled anyway. It's a shame. All along the road are billboards 
telling you not to miss the reptile farm, and not to miss the bear 
campground, and not to miss the Buffalo Park. We drove through the Black 
Hills to Mount Rushmore. At first we didn't think we were in the right place, 
but then, jing-bang, it was right before us. There, high up on a cliff face, 
were the sixty-foot-tall faces of Washington, Jefferson, Lincoln, and Teddy 
Roosevelt, carved right into the rock, staring somberly down on us. 

It was fine seeing the Presidents, I've got nothing against the Presidents, 
but you'd think the Sioux would be mighty sad to have those white faces 
carved into their sacred hill. I bet my mother was upset. I wondered why 
whoever carved them couldn't have put a couple of Native Americans up 
there too. 

Gram and Gramps seemed disappointed as well. Gram didn't even want to 
get out of the car, so we didn't stay long. Gramps said, 'I've had enough of 
South Dakota, how about you, chickabiddy? How about you, gooseberry? 
Let's get a move on.' 

By late afternoon, we were well into Wyoming, and I added up the miles 
left to go. Maybe we could make it, just maybe. Then Gramps said, 'I hope 
nobody minds if we stop at Yellowstone. It would be a sin to miss 
Yellowstone.' 


Gram said, 'Is that where Old Faithful is? Oh, I would love to see Old 
Faithful.' She looked back at me. 'We'll hurry Why, I bet we'll be in Idaho by 
the twentieth without any problem at all.' 



Gramps said, 'Is there some reason why we should be in Idaho by the 
twen-’ Gram interrupted him with a most significant look. ’Oh, mm,' he said. 
'By golly, that sounds about right to me.’ 

30. The Tide Rises 

'Did Peeby’s mother call?' Gram said. 'Did she come home? Did Peeby 
phone the police? Oh, I hope this isn’t a sad story,’ she said. 

Phoebe did go to the police. It was on the day that Mr. Birkway read us the 
poem about the tide and the traveller - a poem that upset both me and 
Phoebe, and I think it is what convinced her, finally, that she had to tell the 
police about her mother. 

Mr. Birkway leaped through the doorway in his usual style, waving his 
arms and saying, 'What a day!’ and, 'Isn't life glorious?’ 

Phoebe leaned over to me and said, ’He's faking it. He doesn't want anyone 
to know he is a filthy murderer. 

Mr. Birkway read a poem by Mr. Longfellow. It was called ’The Tide 
Rises, ’The Tide Falls' Over and over in the poem is the line, ’The tide rises, 
the tide falls,’ and, the way Mr. Birkway read this poem, you could actually 
hear the tide rising and falling, rising and falling. In the poem, a traveller is 
hurrying toward a town, and it is getting darker and darker, and the sea calls 
to the traveller. Then the waves ’with their soft, white hands' wash out the 
traveller's footprints. The next morning, 

The day returns, but nevermore 

Returns the traveller to the shore. 

And the tide rises, the tide falls. 

Mr. Birkway asked people for their reactions to this poem. Megan said that 
it sounded soft and gentle, and it almost made her go to sleep. 

'Gentle?' I said. 'It's not gentle. It’s terrifying.’ My voice was shaking, but I 
couldn't stop it. 'There is this person walking along the beach, and the night 
is getting black, and the person keeps looking behind him to see if someone 


is following, and just when he is looking behind him, a huge wave comes up 
and pulls him into the sea.' 

'A murder,’ Phoebe said. 

I went barrelling on as if it was my poem and I was an expert. ’The waves, 
with their "soft, white hands" grab the traveller. They drown him. They kill 
him. He's gone. 

Ben said, 'Maybe he didn't drown. Maybe he just died, like normal people 
die. 

Phoebe said, 'He drowned.' 

I said, 'It isn't normal to die. It isn't normal. It's terrible.' 

Megan said, 'What about heaven? What about God?' 

Mary Lou said, 'God? Is He in this poem?' 

Ben said, 'Maybe dying could be normal and terrible.' 

When the bell rang, I raced out of the room. Phoebe grabbed me. 'Come 
on,' she said. From her locker, she took the evidence, which she had brought, 
from home. And we both ran the six blocks to the police station. I am not 
exactly sure why I went along with Phoebe. Maybe it was because of that 
poem about the traveller, or maybe it was because I had begun to believe in 
the lunatic, or maybe it was because Phoebe was taking some action, and I 
admired her for it. I wished I had taken some action when my mother left. I 
was not sure what I could have done, but I wished I had done something. 

Phoebe and I stood for five minutes outside the police station, trying to 
make our hearts slow down, and then we went inside and stood at the 
counter. On the other side of it, a thin man with thumpingly large ears was 
writing in a black book. 

'Excuse me,' Phoebe said. 


'I'll be right with you,' he said. 



'This is absolutely urgent. I need to speak to someone about a murder,' 
Phoebe said. 

He looked up quickly. 'A murder?' 

'Yes,' Phoebe said. 'Or, possibly, a kidnapping. But, the kidnapping might 
turn into a murder. 

'Is this a joke?' 

'No, it is not a joke,' Phoebe said. 

'Just a minute.' He went up to a plump woman dressed in a dark blue 
uniform. He whispered to her, and she turned to look at us. She came to the 
counter and leaned over it. She wore big, round glasses with thick lenses. 'Is 
there something I can help you with?' she asked. When Phoebe explained, 
the woman smiled. 'Is this something you girls have read about in a book, 
perhaps?' 

'No, it is not,' I said. That was a turning point, I think, when I came to 
Phoebe's defense. I didn't like the way the woman was looking at us - as if 
we were two fools I wanted that woman to understand why Phoebe was so 
upset. I wanted her to believe Phoebe. 

'May I ask who it is who has been kidnapped or possibly murdered?' the 
woman said. 

Phoebe said, 'My mother. 

'Oh, your mother. Come along, then.' Her voice was rather too sugary and 
sweet, as if she was speaking to tiny children who had asked to go to the 
toilet. 

We followed her to a little room with glass partitions. An enormous man 
with a huge head and neck, and massive shoulders, sat behind the desk. His 
hair was bright red and his face was covered in freckles He did not smile 
when we entered. After the woman repeated what we had told her, he stared 
at us for a long time. 



He said his name was Sergeant Bickle, and Phoebe told him her name. 
Then, she told him everything. She explained about her mother's 
disappearing and about the note from Mrs. Cadaver, and then about Mrs. 
Cadaver's missing husband and the rhododendron bush, and finally about the 
lunatic and the mysterious messages. At this point, Sergeant Pickle said, 
'What sort of messages?’ 

Phoebe was prepared. She pulled them out of her book-bag and laid them 
on the desk in the order in which they had arrived. He read each one aloud: 

Don't judge a man until you've walked two 
moons in his moccasins. 

Everyone has his own agenda. 

In the course of a lifetime, what does it matter? 

You can 't keep the birds of sadness from flying 
over your head, but you can keep them 
from nesting in your hair. 

Sergeant Bickle looked up at the woman seated next to us, and the corners 
of his mouth twitched slightly. To Phoebe, he said, ’How do you think these 
are related to your mother's disappearance?’ 

'I don't know,’ she said. ’That’s what I want you to find out.’ 

Sergeant Pickle asked Phoebe to spell Cadaver's name. 'It means corpse,’ 
Phoebe ’Dead body. 

'I know. Is there anything else you would like to show me?’ 

Phoebe pulled out the envelope with the unidentifiable hair strands. 

’Perhaps you could have these analyzed,' she suggested. 

Sergeant Bickle looked at the woman, and again the comers of his mouth 
twitched slightly. The woman removed her glasses and wiped the lenses 

They were not taking us seriously, and I felt my 'ornery donkey-self 
waking up. I mentioned the potential blood spots that Phoebe had marked 
with adhesive tape. 



'But, my father removed the tape,' Phoebe said. Sergeant Bickle said, 
'Well, thank you very much, Miss Winterbottom and Miss—?’ 


'Hiddle,' I said. 'Salamanca Hiddle.’ 

'Miss Winterbottom and Miss Hiddle, I wonder if you would excuse me a 
few minutes? Would you mind waiting here?' To the woman, he said, 'Why 
don’t you stay with these young ladies?’ 

So, we sat there with the woman. She asked Phoebe Mrs. said. About 
school and about her father and her mother and her sister. She had an awful 
lot of questions I kept wondering where Sergeant Bickle had gone and when 
he was coming back. He was gone for over an hour. There were three 
framed pictures on Sergeant Bickle’s desk, and I tried to lean forward to see 
them, but I couldn't. I was afraid the woman would think I was nosy. Phoebe 
asked the woman if she might try on her glasses. The woman handed them to 
Phoebe. 

'Goodness!' Phoebe said. 'The world must look very different to you than it 
does to me. 

'Yes' she said, 'I suppose it does.’ 

'I am certainly glad that I can see normally,' Phoebe said. 

Sergeant Bickle finally returned. Behind him was Phoebe's father. Phoebe 
looked extensively relieved, but I knew it was not a coincidence that her 
father had come to the police while we were there as well. 

'Miss Winterbottom,' Sergeant Bickle said, ’your father is going to take 
you and Miss Hiddle home now. 

'But—' Phoebe said. 

'Mr. Winterbottom, we'll be in touch. And, remember, if you would like 
me to speak with Mrs. Cadaver— 

'Oh, no,’ Mr. Winterbottom said. He looked embarrassed. 'Really, that 
won't be necessary. I do apologize. 



We followed Mr. Winterbottom outside. In the car he said nothing. I 
thought he might drop me off at my house, but he did not. When we got to 
their house, the only thing he said was 'Phoebe, I'm going to go talk with 
Mrs. Cadaver. You and Sal wait here.’ 

When he returned from visiting Mrs. Cadaver, he said that she was unable 
to give him any more information about Phoebe's mother's call. All Mrs. 
Winterbottom had said was. ’Tell George I am fine and that I will phone him 
soon. Tell him I would phone him now if I could, but I can't.’ 

’That's all?’ Phoebe asked. 

'Your mother also asked Mrs. Cadaver how you and Prudence were. Mrs. 
Cadaver told her that, as far as she knew, you and Prudence were fine.’ 

’Well, I am not fine,' Phoebe said, 'and what does Mrs. Cadaver know 
anyway, and besides, Mrs. Cadaver is making the whole thing up. You 
should let the police talk to her. You should ask her about the rhododendron 
bush. You should find out who this lunatic is Mrs. Cadaver probably hired 
him. You should—’ 

’Phoebe, your imagination is running away with you.’ • 

’It is not.’ 


’Phoebe—’ 


'Mom loves me,’ she said, ’and she would not leave me without any 
explanation. 

Then, her father began to cry. 

31. Breaking In 

’Gol-dang!’ Gramps said. ’What a lot of birds of sad- ness wing-dinging 
their way around Peeby’s family.’ 

Gram said, 'You liked Peeby, didn't you, Salamanca?’ 


I did like Phoebe. In spite of all her wild tales and her cholesterol-madness 
and her annoying comments, there was something about Phoebe that was 
like a magnet. I was drawn to her. I was pretty sure that underneath all that 
odd behaviour was someone who was frightened. And, in a strange way, she 
was like another version of me - she acted out the way I sometimes felt. 

I do not think that Phoebe actually planned to break into Mrs. Cadaver's 
house but, as she was going to bed, she saw Mrs. Cadaver, in her nurse's 
uniform, get into her car and leave. Phoebe waited until her father was 
asleep, and then she phoned me. 'You've got to come over,' she said. 'It's 
urgent.' 

'But, Phoebe, it's late. It's dark. 

'It's urgent, Sal.' 

Phoebe was waiting in front of Mrs. Cadaver's house. There were no lights 
on there. Phoebe said, 'Come on,' and she started up the walk. 

I admit that I was reluctant. 'Phoebe — 

'Shh, I just want to take a quick look.' She crept up onto the porch and 
stood by the door. She listened and then tapped twice. 


'Phoebe—' 


'Shh.' She turned the doorknob. The door was unlocked. 'Apparently, 
neither Mrs. Cadaver nor Mrs. Partridge are worried about lunatics' Phoebe 
whispered. 'Doesn't that tell you something?' 

I don't think Phoebe intended to go inside, but she did, and I followed. We 
stood in the dark hallway. In the room to the right, a shaft of light from the 
street lamp came in through the window. We went into that room. We both 
nearly leaped through the window when someone said, 'Sal?' I started 
backing toward the door. 

'It's a ghost,' Phoebe said. 


'Come here,' the voice said. 



As my eyes adjusted to the dim light, I could see someone huddled in a 
chair in the far comer. When I saw the cane, I was relieved. 'Mrs. Partridge?’ 

'Come over here,’ she said. 'Who's that with you? Is that Phoebe?’ 

Phoebe said, 'Yes.' Her voice was high and quivery. 

'I was just sitting here, reading,' Mrs. Partridge said. 

'Isn't it awfully dark in here?’ I said. I tripped over a table as I made my 
way toward her. 

Mrs. Partridge laughed her wicked laugh. 'It's always dark in here. I don't 
need lights, but you can turn some on if you want to.’ 

As I stumbled around looking for a lamp, Phoebe stood, frozen, near the 
doorway. ’There,’ I said. ’That’s much better.' Mrs. Partridge was sitting in a 
big, overstuffed chair. She was wearing a purple bathrobe and pink slippers 
with floppy bunny ears at the toes On her lap was a book, her fingers resting 
on the page. 'Is it Braille?’ I asked. May I see?' I waved at Phoebe to come 
into the room. I was afraid she was going to run out and leave me. 

Mrs. Partridge handed me the book, and I slid my fingers over the raised 
bumps. I closed my eyes It must be difficult to read in this manner, because 
your fingers have to work like eyes, to 'see' the shape of the dots 'How did 
you know it was us?' I asked. 

'I just knew,’ she said. 'Your shoes make a particular sound and you have a 
particular smell.’ 

’What's the name of this book? What’s it about?’ 

Mrs. Partridge said, 'Murder at Midnight. It's a mystery.' 

Phoebe said, 'Erp,' and looked around the room. 

Each time I went into that house I noticed new things. It was a scary place. 
The walls were lined with shelves crammed with old musty books. The room 
looked like some sort of museum filled with strange objects. On the floor 
were three rugs with dark, swirly patterns of wild beasts in forests Two 


chairs were covered in similar, ghastly designs. A sofa was draped in a bear 
skin. 

On the wall behind the couch were two thumpingly grim African masks 
The mouths on the masks were wide open, as if in the midst of a scream. 
Everywhere you looked there was something startling: a stuffed squirrel, a 
kite in the shape of a dragon, a wooden cow with a spear piercing its side. 

'Goodness!' Phoebe said. 'What a lot of - of - unusual things' 

'Feel free to look around,' Mrs. Partridge said. 

Phoebe knelt to examine a spot on the floor. 

'What's the matter?’ Mrs. Partridge said. 

Phoebe jumped up. 'Nothing. Nothing whatsoever. 

'Did I drop something on the floor?' Mrs. Partridge asked. 

'No. Nothing whatsoever on the floor,' Phoebe said. Leaning against the 
back of the sofa was an enormous sword. Phoebe examined the blade. 

'Careful you don't cut yourself,' Mrs. Partridge said. 

Phoebe stepped back. Even I found this unsettling, that Mrs. Partridge 
could see what Phoebe was doing even though she couldn't actually see her. 

Mrs. Partridge said, 'Isn't this a grandiful room?' 

'Grandiful?' Phoebe said. 

'Yes! Most grandiful - and a little peculible, too, I suppose,’ Mrs. Partridge 
said. 

’Peculible?’ Phoebe said. 

'Phoebe and I have to be going...’ We backed toward the door. 



'By the way,’ Mrs. Partridge said, as we reached the doorway, 'What was it 
you wanted?’ 

Phoebe looked at me and I looked at Phoebe. 'We were just passing by,' I 
said, 'and we thought we would see how you were doing.' 

'That's nice,' Mrs. Partridge said, patting her knees. 'Oh, Phoebe, I think I 
met your brother. 

Phoebe said, 'I don't have a brother. 

'Oh?' Mrs. Partridge tapped her head. 'I guess this old noggin isn't as sharp 
as it used to be.’ As we left, she said, 'Goodness! You girls stay up late.’ 

Outside, Phoebe said, ’At least, I was able to do a preliminary investigation 
without arousing any suspicion. I'll make a list of items, which the police 
will want to investigate further: the sword, the suspicious spot on the floor, 
and several hair strands, which I picked up. 

'Phoebe, you know when you said that your mother would never leave 
without an explanation? Well, she might. A person - a mother - might do 
that.' 

Phoebe said, My mother wouldn't. My mother loves me.' 

'But, she might love you and still not have been able to explain.' I was 
thinking about the letter my mother left me. 'Maybe it would be too painful 
for her to explain. Maybe it would seem too permanent.' 

'I don't know what in the world you are talking about.’ 

'She might not come back, Phoebe—’ 

'Shut up, Sal.’ 

'She might not. I just think you should be prepared—' 


'She is too coming back. You don't know what you're talking about. You're 
being horrid.' Phoebe ran into the house. 



When I got home and had crept up to my room, I remembered what my 
father had said to me that one night. 'She's not coming back.' He said it 
straight out like that. I said, 'She is, too.' He said, 'No, she isn't.' And we 
argued back and forth. I was just like Phoebe. I didn't want to believe it. 

On the day before, Phoebe had shown me some things in her room that 
reminded her of her mother: a handmade birthday card, a photograph of 
Phoebe and her mother, and a bar of lavender soap. When Phoebe pulled a 
blouse out of the closet, she said she could see her mother standing at the 
ironing board smoothing the blouse with her hand. 'My mother once said 
that she thought she was the only person in the world who actually enjoys 
ironing,' Phoebe said. The wall opposite Phoebe's bed was painted violet. 

She said, 'My mother painted it last summer while I painted the trim at the 
bottom.' 

And I knew exactly what Phoebe was doing and exactly why. I had done 
the same things when my mother left. My father was right: my mother did 
haunt our house in Bybanks, and the fields and the barn. She was 
everywhere. You couldn't look at a single thing without being reminded of 
her. 

When we moved to Euclid, one of the first things I did was to unpack gifts 
my mother had given me. On the wall, I tacked the poster of the red hen, 
which my • mother had given me for my fifth birthday, and the drawing of 
the bam she had given me for my last birthday. On my desk were pictures of 
her and cards from her. On the bookshelf the wooden animals and books 
were presents from her. 

Sometimes, I would walk around the room and look at each of these things 
and try to remember exactly the day she had given them to me. I tried to 
picture what the weather was like and what room we were in and what she 
was wearing and what precisely she had said. This was not a game. It was a 
necessary, crucial thing to do. If I did not have these things and remember 
these occasions, then she might disappear forever. She might never have 
been. 

In my bureau were three things of hers, which I had taken from her closet 
after she left: a red, fringed shawl, a blue sweater, and a yellow-flowered 
cotton dress which was always my favourite. These things had her smell on 
them. 



Once, before she left, my mother said that if you visualize something 
happening, you can make it happen. For example, if you are about to run a 
race, you visualize yourself running the race and crossing the finishing line 
first, and presto! When the time comes, it really happens. The only thing I 
did not understand was what if everyone visualized himself winning the 
race? 

Still, when she left, this is what I did. I visualized her reaching for the 
phone. Then I visualized her dial- ling the phone. I visualized our phone 
number clicking through the wires. I visualized the phone ringing. 

It did not ring. 

I visualized her riding the bus back to Bybanks. I visualized her walking 
up the driveway. 1 visualized her opening the door. 

It did not happen. 

While I was thinking about all of this that night after Phoebe and I crept 
into Mrs. Cadaver's house, I also thought about Ben. I had the sudden urge 
to run over to the Finneys and ask him where his own mother was, but it was 
too late. The Finneys would be asleep. 

Instead, I lay there thinking of the poem about the traveller, and I could see 
the tide rising and falling, and those horrid little white hands snatching the 
traveller. How could it be normal, that traveller dying? And how could such 
a thing be normal and terrible both at the same time? 

I stayed awake the whole night. I knew that if I closed my eyes, I would 
see the tide and the white hands. I thought about Mr. Winterbottom crying. 
That was the saddest thing. It was sadder than seeing my own father cry, 
because my father is the sort of person you expect might cry if he was 
terribly upset. But I had never, ever, expected Mr. Winterbottom - stiff Mr. 
Winterbottom - to cry. It was the first time I realized that he actually cared 
about Mrs. Winterbottom. 

As soon as it was daylight, I phoned Phoebe. 'Phoebe, we've got to find 
her. 



'That's what I've been telling you,' she said. 

32. The Photograph 

The next day was most 'peculible', as Mrs. Partridge would say. 

Phoebe arrived at school with another message, which she had found on 
her porch that morning: We never know the worth of water until the well is 
dry. 'It's a clue,' Phoebe said. 'Maybe my mother is hidden in a well.' 

I walked straight into Ben when I went to my locker. That grapefruit 
aroma was in the air. He looked past me at Phoebe, who was going into 
class. 'Is she going to wear that ratty old sweater every day?' he asked. 

'It's not ratty,' I said. 'It's her mother’s Speaking of mothers, what I wanted 
to say - what I wanted to ask you—' I was trying to find a way to ask about 
his own mother, but he interrupted me. 

'You've got something on your face,' he said. He reached up and with soft, 
warm fingers he rubbed the side of my face. 'It's probably your breakfast.' 

I don't know what came over me. I was going to kiss him. I leaned forward 
just as he turned around and slammed the door of his locker. My lips ended 
up pressed against the cold, metal locker. 

'You're weird, Sal,' he said, as he went off to class. 

I decided that kissing was thumpingly more complicated than I had ever 
imagined. Circumstances had to be exactly right in order for the kiss to 
occur: both people had to be in the same place at the same time and both 
people had to remain still so that the kiss ended up in the right place. 
Actually, I was relieved that my lips ended up on the cold metal locker. I 
could not imagine what had come over me. I could not imagine what might 
have happened if the kiss had landed on Ben's mouth. It was a shivery thing 
to consider. 

I made it through the rest of my classes without losing control of my lips. 
The day seemed to be returning to normal - until English class, that is. Mr. 
Birkway came sailing into class carrying our journals I had forgotten all 
about them. He was leaping all over the place exclaiming, 'Dynamite! 


Unbelievable! Incredible!' He said he couldn't wait to share the journals with 
the class. 

Mary Lou Finney said, 'Share with the class?' 

Mr. Birkway said, 'Not to worry! Everyone has something magnificent to 
say. I haven't read through every page yet, but I was so impressed that I 
wanted to share some of these passages with you right away.' 

People were squirming all over the room. I was trying to remember what I 
had written. Mary Lou leaned over to me and said, 'Well, I'm not worried. I 
wrote a special note in the front of mine distinctly asking him not to read 
mine. Mine was private.' 

Mr. Birkway smiled all around the room at each nervous face. 'You needn't 
worry,' he said. Change any names that you've used, and in case some of you 
are nervous about sharing your thoughts and observations, I will fold this 
piece of yellow paper over the cover of whichever journal I am reading, so 
that you cannot possibly know whose it is.' 

Ben asked if he could go to the bathroom. Christy said she felt a little sick 
and asked if she could go to the nurse. Phoebe asked me to touch her 
forehead because she was pretty sure she had a fever. Mr. Birkway looked 
all around the room. Usually he would let people go to the bathroom or to 
the nurse, but this time he said, 'Let's not malinger!' He picked up a journal, 
slipping the yellow paper over it before anyone had a chance to examine the 
cover for clues as to its author's identity. Everyone took a deep breath. You 
could see people poised nervously, waiting as tensely as if Mr. Birkway was 
going to announce someone's execution. Mr. Birkway read: 

I think that Betty [he changed the name, you could tell, because there was 
no Betty in our school] will go to hell because she always takes the Lord's 
name in vain. She says 'God!' every five seconds. 

Mary Lou Finney was turning purple. 'Who wrote that?' she said. 'Did you, 
Christy? I'll bet you did.' 


Christy stared down at her desk. 



'I do not say "God!" every five seconds. I do not. And I am not going to 
Hell.' 

Mr. Birkway tried to intervene. 'Excuse—' 

’Omnipotent,' Mary Lou said. ’That’s what I say now I say, Omnipotent! 
And Alpha and Omega!’ 

Mr. Birkway was desperately trying to explain what he had enjoyed about 
that passage. He said that most of us are not aware that we might be using 
words such as ’God!’ which offend other people. Mary Lou leaned over to 
me and said, 'Is he serious? Does he actually really and truly believe that 
beef-brained Christy is troubled by my saying "God" (which I do not, by the 
way, say any more anyway)? Omnipotent. 

Christy was wearing a pious look on her face, as if God himself had just 
come down from heaven to sit on her desk. 

Mr. Birkway quickly selected another journal. He flipped it open and read: 

Linda [there was no Linda in our class either] is my best friend. I tell her 
just about everything, and she tells me EVERTTHING, even things I do not 
want to know, like what she ate for breakfast and what her father wears to 
bed and how much her new sweater cost. Sometimes things like that are just 
not interesting. 

Mr. Birkway was saying how much he liked this passage because it 
showed that even though someone might be our best friend, he or she could 
still drive us crazy. Beth Ann turned ail the way around in her seat and sent 
wicked eyebrow-messages to Mary Lou. 

Mr. Birkway flipped ahead in the same journal to another passage. He 
read: 

I think Jeremiah [there was certainly no Jeremiah in our school] is pig- 
headed ... His skin is always pink ... and his hair is always clean and shiny ... 
but he is really a jerk. 


I thought Mary Lou Linney was going to fall out of her chair. Alex was 
bright, bright pink. He looked at Mary Lou as if she had recently plunged a 



red hot stake into his heart. Mary Lou said, 'No - 1 - no, it isn't what you 
think-I— 

Misako said, 'What is jerk?’ about twenty times 

Mr. Birkway tried to explain that he liked this pas- sage because it showed 
conflicting feelings about someone. 

I'll say it does,' Alex said. 

The bell rang. First, you could hear sighs of relief from the people whose 
journals had not been read, and then people started talking a mile a minute. 
'Hey, Mary Lou, look at Alex's pink skin,' and 'Hey Mary Lou, what does 
Beth Ann's father wear to bed?' 

Beth Ann was standing about one inch away from Mary Lou's face. 'I do 
not talk on and on,' Beth Am said, 'and that wasn't very nice of you to 
mention that, and I do not tell you everything, and the only reason I ever 
mentioned what my father wore to bed was because we were talking, if you 
will recall, about men's bathing suits being more comfortable than women's 
and...' On and on she went. 

Mary Lou was trying to get across the room to Alex, who was standing 
there as pink as can be. 'Alex!' she called. 'Wait! I wrote that before - wait... 

It was a jing-bang of a mess. I was glad I had to get out of there. Phoebe 
and I were going to the police again. 

Our visit to the police was quick. We got in to see Sergeant Bickle right 
away. Phoebe slapped the newest message about the water in the well onto 
his desk, dumped the hairs which she had collected at Mrs. Cadaver's house 
on top of the message, and then placed her list of Further items to 
Investigate' on top of that. 

Sergeant Bickle frowned. 'I don't think you girls understand. Why don't 
you take these things home and do something wholesome, like run around 
the block or play a game of tennis?' 

Phoebe went into a rage. 'You idiot,' she said. She scooped up the message, 
the hairs, and her list and ran out of the office. 



Sergeant Bickle glanced at me and followed her. I waited, thinking he 
would bring Phoebe back and calm her down. I looked at the photographs on 
his desk, the ones I had not been able to see the day before. In one was 
Sergeant Bickle and a friendly looking woman - his wife, I supposed. The 
second picture was of a shiny black car. The third picture was of Sergeant 
Bickle, the woman, and a young man - their son, I figured. I looked closer. 

I recognized the son. It was the lunatic. 

33. Chicken and Blackberry Kisses 

Gramps barrelled through Wyoming like a house on fire. We snaked 
through winding roads where the trees leaned close, rustling, rush, rush, 
rush. The road curved alongside rivers that rolled and gabbled, hurry, hurry, 
hurry. 

It was late when we arrived at Yellowstone. All we got to see that evening 
was a hot spring. 'We walked on boardwalks placed across the bubbling 
mud. ’Huzza, huzza!’ Gram said. We stayed at the Old Faithful Inn in a 
Frontier Cabin. I’d never seen Gram so excited. She could not wait for the 
next morning. ’We’re gonna see Old Faithful,’ she said, over and over. 

’It won’t take too very long, will it?’ I said, and I felt like a mule saying it, 
because Gram was so looking forward to it. 

’Don’t you worry, Salamanca: Gram said. ’We’ll just watch that old geyser 
blow up and then we’ll hit the road.’ 

I prayed all night long to the elm tree outside. I prayed that we would not 
get in an accident, that we would get to Lewiston, Idaho, in time for my 
mother’s birthday, and that we would bring her home. Later I would realize 
that I had prayed for the wrong things. 

That night, Gram was so excited that she could not sleep. She rambled on 
about all sorts of things. She said to cramps 'Remember that letter from the 
egg man that you found under the mattress?’ 


'Dang it, of course I remember. We had a wing-ding of an argument over 
it. You tried to tell me that you had no dang idea how it got there. You said 
the egg man must’ve slipped into the bedroom and put it there.’ 

'Well, I want you to know that I put it there.’ 

'I know that,’ Gramps said. ’I’m not a complete noodle. 

'It’s the only love letter anybody ever wrote me, Gram said. 'You never 
wrote me any love letters’ 

'Well, why didn’t you ever tell me you wanted one?’ 

To me, Gram said, 'Your grandfather nearly killed the egg man over that 
letter. 

’Hell’s bells,’ Gramps said. ’He wasn’t worth killing.’ 

'Maybe not,’ Gram said, 'but Gloria was’ 

'Oh, yes’ Gramps said, placing his hand on his heart and pretending to 
swoon, ’Gloria!’ 

'Cut that out,’ Gram said. She rolled over on her side and said to me, ’Tell 
me about Peeby. Tell me that story, but don’t make it too awfully sad.’ She 
folded her hands on her chest. ’Tell me what happened with the lunatic.’ 

When I saw the picture of the lunatic on Sergeant Bickle’s desk, I tore out 
of that office faster than lightning. I ran past Sergeant Bickle standing in the 
parking lot. There was no sign of Phoebe. I ran all the way to her house. As I 
was passing Mrs. Cadaver's house, Mrs. Partridge called to me from her 
porch. 

I stopped. ’You look all dressed up,' I said. ’Are you going somewhere?' 

’Oh, yes' she said. 'I'm redible. 


’You mean "ready"?' 



'Yes redible as can be.’ She tottered down the steps swinging her cobra 
cane in front of her. 

'Are you walking?' I asked. 

She reached down and touched her legs. 'Isn't that what you call it when 
you move your legs like I am doing?' 

'NO, I meant are you walking to wherever you're going?' 

'Oh, no, it's much too far for these legs Jimmy's coming. He'll be here any 
minute.' Mrs. Partridge continued down the front walk. I was amazed that 
she didn't fall. She stepped out so confidently, barely using her cane at all. A 
car pulled up in front of the house. 

'There he is' she said. She called out to the driver, 'I'm redible. I said I 
would be, and here I am.' 

The driver leaped out of the car. 'Sal?' he said. 'I had no idea you two were 
neighbours' It was Mr. Birkway. 

'We're not neighbours: I said. 'It's Phoebe, actually, who is the neighbor. 

'Is that right?' he said. He opened the car door for Mrs. Partridge. 'Come 
on, Mom,' he said. 'Let's get a move on.' 

'Mom?' I said. I looked at Mrs. Partridge. 'This is your son? You're his 
mother?' 

'Why, of course,' Mrs. Partridge said.' This is my little Jimmy.' 

'But, he's a Birkway. . ..?' 

Mrs. Partridge said, 'I was a Birkway once. Then I was a Partridge. I'm still 
a Partridge.' 

'Then, who is Mrs. Cadaver?' I said. 


'My little Margie,' she said. 'She was a Birkway, too. Now she's a Cadaver. 



I said to Mr. Birkway, 'Mrs. Cadaver is your sister?' 


'We're twins' Mr. Birkway said. 

'They're just alike,' Mrs. Partridge said. 

When they had driven away, I knocked at Phoebe's door. I knocked and 
knocked. There was no answer. At home, I dialed Phoebe's number over and 
over. No answer. 

The next day at school, I was relieved to see Phoebe. 'Where were you?' I 
said. 'I phoned and phoned - 1 have something to tell you... 

She turned away. 'I don't want to talk about it,' she said. 

'But, Phoebe—' 

'I do not wish to discuss it,' she said. 

I could not figure out what on earth was the matter with her. It was a 
terrible day. We had tests in Maths and Science. In French, our teacher 
lectured us for the entire class period about how sloppy our work was. At 
lunch, Phoebe ignored me. Then came English. 

Mr. Birkway skipped into the room. People were gnawing on their fingers 
and tapping their feet and wriggling around and generally getting ulcers, 
wondering if Mr. Birkway was going to read from the journals. I just kept 
staring at him. He and Margaret Cadaver were twins? Was that possible? 

The most disappointing part of that piece of knowledge was that he was not 
going to fall in love with Mrs. Cadaver and marry her and take her away. 

Mr. Birkway opened a cupboard, pulled out the journals, slipped the 
yellow paper over the cover of one and read: 

This is what I like about Jane. [There was no Jane, of course. He was 
substituting a name.] She is smart, but doesn't act like she knows everything. 
She is cute. She smells good. She is cute. She makes laugh. She is cute. She 
is friendly. And, did I mention that she is cute? 



While Mr. Birkway was reading, I got a prickly feeling up and down my 
arms. I was wondering if Ben had written this about me, but then I realized 
that Ben didn't even know me when he wrote his journal. A little buzz was 
going around the room as people shifted in their seats. Christy was smiling, 
Megan was smiling, Beth Am was smiling, Mary Lou was smiling. Every in 
the room was smiling. Each girl thought that this had been written about her. 

I looked carefully at each of the boys. Alex was gazing nonchalantly at 
Mr. Birkway, Shigeru was asleep in the back row, others were doodling, and 
then I saw Ben. Ele was sitting with his hands over his ears, staring down at 
his desk. The prickly feeling travelled all the way up to my neck and then 
went skipping down my spine. He did write that, but he did not write it about 
me. 


Mr. Birkway exclaimed, 'Ah, love, ah, life!' Sighing, he pulled out another 
journal and read: 

Jane doesn't know the first thing about boys. She once asked me what 
kisses taste like, so you could tell she hadn't ever kissed anyone. I told her 
that they taste like chicken, and she believed me. She is so dumb sometimes. 

Mary Lou Finney almost jumped straight out of her chair. 'You cabbage 
head.’ she said to Beth Ann. 'You beef brain.' Beth Ann was winding a strand 
of hair around and around and around her finger. Mary Lou stood up. 'I did 
not believe you, and I do too know what they taste like, and it isn't chicken. 

Mr. Birkway looked astonished at this outburst. Ben drew a cartoon. It 
showed two stick-figures kissing. In the air over their heads was a cartoon 
bubble with a chicken inside. The chicken was saying, 'Bawk, bawwwk, 
bawwwk.' 

Mr. Birkway turned a few pages in the same journal and read: 

I hate doing this. I hate to write. I hate to read. I hate journals. I especially 
hate English where teachers only talk about idiot symbols. I hate that idiot 
poem about the snowy woods, and I hate it when people say the woods in 
that poem symbolize death or beauty or sex or any old thing you want. I hate 
that. Maybe the woods are just woods. 



Beth Ann stood up and stared defiantly around the room. 'Mr. Birkway,’ 
she said, 'I hate this. I do hate school, I do hate books, I do hate English, I do 
hate symbols, and I most especially hate these idiot journals.’ 

There was a hush in the room. Mr. Birkway stared at Beth Ann for a 
minute, and in that minute, I was reminded of Mrs. Cadaver. For that brief 
time, his eyes looked just like hers I was afraid he was going to strangle 
Beth Ann, but then he smiled and his eyes became friendly enormous cow 
eyes once again. I think he hypnotized her, because Beth Ann sat down very 
slowly. Mr. Birkway said. ’Beth Ann, I know exactly how you feel. Exactly. 
I love this passage.’ 

'You do?’ she said. 

'It’s so honest.’ 

I had to admit, you couldn’t get more honest than Beth Ann telling her 
English teacher that she hated symbols and English and idiot journals. 

Mr. Birkway said, ’I used to feel exactly like this.’ 


'You did?’ 


Mr. Birkway said, ’I could not understand what all the fuss was about 
symbols' He rummaged around in his desk. ’I want to show you something.' 
He was pulling papers out and hinging them around. Finally, he held up a 
picture. ’Ah, here it is. Dynamite!’ He held the picture in front of Ben. ’What 
is this?' he asked Ben. 

Ben said, 'It's a vase. Obviously.' 

Mr. Birkway held the drawing in front of Beth Ann, who looked as if she 
might cry. Mr. Birkway said, ’Beth Ann, what do you see?' A little tear 
dropped down on her cheek. 'It’s OK, Beth Am,’ Mr. Birkway said. ’What do 
you see?' 

'I don’t see any idiot vase,' she said. 'I see two people. They're looking at 
each other. 


’Right,’ Mr. Birkway said. ’Brave!' 



'I'm right?' Beth Ann said. 'Brave?' 


Ben said, 'Huh? ~o people?' I was thinking the same thing myself What 
two people? 

Mr. Birkway said to Ben, 'And you were right, too. Brave!’ He asked 
everyone else, How many see a vase?' About half the class raised their 
hands 'And how many see two faces?’ The rest of the class raised their hands 

Then Mr. Birkway pointed out how you could see both. If you looked only 
at the white part in the centre you could clearly see the vase. If you looked 
only at the dark parts on the side, you could see two profiles. The curvy 
sides of the vase became the outline of the two heads facing each other. 

People were saying, 'Wow', and 'Neat', and 'Man', and 'Cool'. Shigeru and 
Misako were giggling away, with their hands covering their mouths. ’Yes, 
yes’ they said. ’Yes, yes’ 

Mr. Birkway said that the drawing was a bit like symbols. Maybe the artist 
only intended to draw a vase, and maybe some people look at this picture 
and see only that vase. That’s fine, but if some people look at it and see 
faces, what is wrong with that? It is faces to that person who is looking at it. 
And, what is even more magnificent, you might see both. 

Beth Ann said, "Two for your money?’ 

'Isn't it interesting,' Mr. Birkway said, 'to find both? Isn't it interesting to 
discover that snowy woods could be death and beauty and even, I suppose, 
sex? Wow! Literature!' 

'Did he say sex?' Ben said. He copied the drawing into his notebook. 

I thought Mr. Birkway was finished with the journals for that day, but he 
said, 'Let me find one or two more selections I'll take one off the bottom. I 
haven't read this far yet. I'll choose randomly.' He made a great show of 
closing his eyes, and pulling something from near the bottom of the stack. 
With his eyes still closed, he slipped the yellow paper over it, but it was too 
late. I knew it was mine, because 1 had not written in a blue booklet as 



everyone else had. Mine was on plain notebook paper. I wanted to die. Mr. 
Birkway read: 


She popped the blackberries into her mouth. 

Then she looked all around- 

I could hardly bear it. I wanted him to stop. He didn't. He read on: 

She took two quick steps up to the maple tree 
and threw her arms around it, and kissed it soundly. 

People were giggling. Oh, how I wanted Mr. Birkway to stop, but he did 
not. He went on: 

'I just wanted you to know, Mr. Birkway said, 'that Mr. Cadaver is not 
buried in her garden. I've also just learned about your mother, Phoebe, and 
I'm sorry that she is gone, but I want to assure you that Margaret would not 
have kidnapped or murdered her. 

After Mr. Birkway left, Phoebe and I sat on the front porch. Phoebe said, 

'If Mrs. Cadaver didn't kidnap or murder my mother, then where is she? 
What can I do? Where should I look?’ 

’Phoebe,’ I said. ’There’s something I’ve got to tell you.’ 

'Look, Sal, if you're going to tell me she’s not coming back, I don’t want to 
hear it. You might as well go home now. You might as well—' 



'No, Phoebe, that isn't it. I know who the lunatic is. It’s Sergeant Bickle’s 
son. 

And so we devised a plan. 

At home that night, all I could think about was Mrs. Cadaver. I could see 
her in her white uniform, working in the emergency room. I could see an 
ambulance pulling up with its blue lights flashing, and I could see her 
walking briskly to the swinging doors, with her wild hair all around her face. 
I could see the stretchers being wheeled in through the doorway and I could 
see Mrs. Cadaver looking down at them. 

I could feel her heart thumping like mad as she realized it was her own 
husband and her own mother lying there. My own heart started thumping 
like mad as I imagined Mrs. Cadaver touching her husband's face. It was as 
if I was walking in her moccasins, that’s how much my own heart was 
pumping and my own hands were sweating. 

I started wondering if the birds of sadness had built their nest in Mrs. 
Cadaver's hair afterwards, and, if so, how she got rid of them. Her husband 
dying and her mother being blinded were events that would matter in the 
course of a lifetime. I saw everyone else going on with their own agendas 
while Mrs. Cadaver was frantically trying to keep her husband and her 
mother alive. Did she regret anything? Did she know the worth of water 
before the well was dry? 

And then I saw that all those messages - about the moccasins and the 
agendas and the birds of sadness and the well and the course of a lifetime - 
all those messages had invaded my brain and affected the way I looked at 
things. 

'Are you sleepy yet, Gram?’ I asked. My voice was hoarse from talking so 
much. 

'No, chickabiddy, but you go on to sleep. I'm just going to lie here a while 
and think about things.' She nudged Gramps. 'You forgot to say about the 
marriage bed.’ 


Gramps yawned. 'Sorry, gooseberry.’ He patted the bed and said it. 



35. Old Faithful 


That next day was probably one of the best, and surely the worst, in 
Gram's and Gramps' lives The whispers woke me early. It was the sixth day, 
and the next day was my mother's birthday. We had to get out of Wyoming 
and through Montana. Gramps was already up, hut Gram was lying there on 
the bed, staring at the ceiling. 'Did you ever go to sleep?' I asked. 

'No,' she said, 'I didn't feel like sleeping. I can sleep later. Let's get a move 
on.' She climbed out of bed. 'Let's go see that Old Faithful. I've waited my 
whole entire life to see Old Faithful. 

We had breakfast in the main lodge and then drove on into Yellowstone 
Park, following signs to Old Faithful. 'You know,' Gramps teased, 'there are 
about ten thousand other geysers here. Why don't we go see any old one?' 

'I'm going to see Old Faithful,' Gram said. 

'You've sure got your heart set on that, don't you, you stubborn 
gooseberry?' 

'I sure do,' Gram said. 

We parked the car and walked up a low hill. I was afraid Gram was going 
to be disappointed because it didn't look like much at first. There was a rope 
fence around a mound on the side of the hill. People were gathered around 
the fence, but it was early, and we were able to get right up to the rope. The 
ground was scrabbly dirt, and in the centre of the rope enclosure, about 
twenty feet away, was a hole. 

'Fleck.' Gram said, 'can't we get any closer than this?' 

Gramps and I walked over to read a sign about Old Faithful. A park ranger 
rushed past us yelling. 'Ma'am! Ma'am!' Fie ran toward the rope fence. 

'Gol-dang,' Gramps said. 

Gram was crawling under the rope. The ranger stopped her. 'Ma'am, there's 
a reason for that rope,' he said. 


Gram brushed off her dress 'I just wanted a better look.’ 


'Don't worry,' the ranger said. 'You'll get a good look. Please stay behind 
the rope.' 

The sign said that Old Faithful was due to erupt in fifteen minutes. More 
and more people gathered around the rope. There were people of all ages: 
little babies crying, grannies sitting on folding stools, teenagers plugged into 
radio headsets, couples smooching. There were people speaking languages 
other than English: next to us was a tour group of Italians; across the way 
was a group of Germans. There were black skins and white skins. 

Gram was tapping her fingers together, getting more and more excited. ’Is 
it time?’ she kept saying. ’Is it almost time?’ 

The crowd became quiet a few minutes before Old Faithful was due to go 
off everyone stared at the hole. Everyone was listening. 

'Is it time?’ Gram said. 

There was a faint noise and a little spit shot out of the hole. The man next 
to me said, 'Aww. is that all..'. Another noise, this time a little louder, a 
grating and crunching sound like walking on gravel. Two fitful spits. 
'Aww...' the man said. 

Then it was like the radiator boiling over or the tea kettle blowing its top. 
Old Faithful hissed and steamed. A sudden spout of water shot out, maybe 
three feet high. 

'Aww...' the man said. 'Is that all—' 

More steam, boiling and hissing, and a huge jing-bang spray of water 
surged out, climbing and climbing, and then more and more, until it looked 
like a whole river of water was shooting straight up into the air. 'It looks like 
an upsidey-down waterfall!’ Gram said. All the while there was a walloping 
hissing, and I could have sworn the ground rumbled and trembled 
underneath us. The warm mist blew toward us and people started backing 
away. 



All except Gram. She stood there grinning, tilting her face up to the mist, 
and staring at that fountain of water. 'Oh,' she said. 'Oh, huzza, huzza!' She 
shouted it into the air and noise. She practically sang it out. 

Gramps wasn't watching Old Faithful. Fie was watching Gram. Fie put his 
arms around her and hugged her. 'You like this old geyser, don't you?' he 
said. 

'Oh!' Gram said. 'Oh, yes, I do. 

The man next to me was staring open-mouthed at Old Faithful. 'Lordy,' he 
said, 'lordy, that's amazing.' 

Gradually, Old Faithful slowed back down. We watched it undo itself and 
retreat back into its hole. We stood there even after everyone else had drifted 
away. At last, Gram sighed, and said, 'OK, let's go. 

We were inside the car and about to leave when Gram started to cry. 'Gol- 
dang.' Gramps said. 'What's the matter?' 

Gram sniffled. 'Oh, nothing.' she said. 'I'm just happy. I'm so happy I got to 
see Old Faithful. 

'You old gooseberry, Gramps said, and on we went. 'We're gonna eat up 
Montana,' Gramps said. 'We're gonna get to the I-dee-ho border tonight. You 
watch me. I'm putting this pedal to the metal...' He stepped down on the gas 
and peeled out of the parking lot. 'I- dee-ho, here we come!' 

36. The Plan 

All day long we ate up the road through Montana. It hadn't looked so far 
on the map, but it was all mountains. We started in the foothills of the 
Rockies as we left Yellowstone, and all day we climbed up and down. 
Sometimes the road snaked along the side of a cliff, and the only thing 
between us and the sharp drop was a piddly railing. Often, as we sailed 
around a bend, we came face to face with a camping trailer swinging its 
wide body around the curve. 


'These roads are a pisser,' Gramps said, but he was like a little kid riding a 
hobby horse. 'Gid-yap, let’s get a move on,’ he said, encouraging the car up a 
hill. 'Hee- ya,' he said as we swept down the other side. 

I felt as if I was torn in two pieces. Half of me was ogling the scenery. I 
had to admit that it was as pretty as - maybe even prettier than - Bybanks. 
Trees and rocks and mountains. Rivers and flowers. Deer and moose and 
rabbits. It was an amazing country, an enormous country. 

But the other half of me was a quivering pile of jelly, I could see our car 
bursting through the railing and plunging down the cliff. As we approached 
each curve, I could see us smashing straight on into a truck or a camper. 
Every time I saw a bus, I watched it sway. I watched its tyres spin 
dangerously close to the gravel at the road's edge. I watched it plunge on, 
eating up the road, defying those curves. 

Gram sat quietly, with her hands folded on her lap. I thought she might 
sleep, especially after staring awake all night, but she didn't. She wanted to 
hear about Peeby. So all day long, as I took in the scenery, and as I imagined 
us in a thousand accidents and as I prayed underneath it all to any tree 
whizzing by, I talked about Peeby. I wanted to tell it all today. I wanted to 
finish it. 

On the day after Mr. Birkway appeared at Phoebe's house and told us 
about Mr. Cadaver, Phoebe and I were going to put our plan in motion. We 
were going to track down Sergeant Bickle's son and, according to Phoebe, 
discover the whereabouts of Phoebe's mother. I wasn't positive that Sergeant 
Bickle's son was a lunatic, and I wasn't convinced he would lead us to 
Phoebe's mother, but enough of Phoebe's tales had been transplanted into my 
brain so that I was caught up in the plan. Like Phoebe, I was ready to take 
some action. 

We could hardly sit still all day at school. Phoebe, especially, was fired up. 
She was worried, too. She was afraid we might not discover her mother 
alive, and I was beginning to share that fear. At school, everyone was still 
buzzing about the journal readings everyone wanted to know who had 
written the journal entry about the murder. Alex avoided 


Mary Lou because of what she had said about his being a pink jerk, and 
Mary Lou avoided Beth Ann because of what Beth Ann had written about 



the chicken kisses. Megan and Christy taunted Beth Ann with, 'Did you 
really tell Mary Lou that kisses taste like chicken? Did she really believe 
you?' and they taunted me with, 'Do you really kiss trees? Didn't you know 
you're supposed to kiss boys?' 

Kisses were on my mind that day for other reasons. They were in the air. 

At lunch, my tray came in contact with Ben's mouth. He might have been 
aiming a kiss at my hand (a peculible thing for him to do), but he ended up 
removing my bread crusts from his cheek and dashing out of the room. 

In English class, everyone badgered Mr. Birkway to finish reading the 
journal entry that he had begun yesterday, the one about Mrs. Corpse and the 
body in the garden, but Mr. Birkway did not read any more journals Instead, 
he apologized for hurting people's feelings by reading their private thoughts 
aloud, and then he sent us to the library. 

There, Ben trailed me for the next half-hour. If I looked at the fiction 
section, he was right beside me. If I moved over to examine the magazines, 
there he was flipping through one as well. Once, his face made con- tact 
with my shoulder. He was definitely trying to plant a kiss on me, I knew he 
was, but there was nothing I could do about it. I could not help it that 
whenever he aimed his mouth in my direction, my body was already moving 
away. I needed a little warning. 

I did try remaining completely still for several consecutive minutes, and 
during those minutes, I detected Ben leaning slightly toward me several 
times. Each time, however, he drew back, as if someone were con- trolling 
him by an invisible thread. 

Across the library, Beth Ann called. 'Sal, there's a spider - oh, Sal, kill it!’ 

When the final bell rang, Phoebe and I were out of school like a shot. At 
Phoebe's house, we examined the telephone directory. 'We’ve got to hurry,’ 
Phoebe said, 'before Prudence or my father come home.' There were six 
Pickles listed in the directory. We took turns calling. Each time, we asked 
for Sergeant Pickle. The first two people said we must have the wrong 
number. The third number we dialed was busy. The fourth number, no 
answer. The fifth number was answered by a crotchety woman who said, 'I 
don't know any sergeants!’ 



The sixth number was answered by an elderly man who must have been 
quite lonely because he talked on and on about once knowing a Sergeant 
Freeman in the war, but that was back in 1944, and he hadn't a clue as to 
what had become of Sergeant Freeman, and now that he thought about it, he 
also knew a Sergeant Bones and a Sergeant Dowdy or maybe it was 
Dowper, he couldn't quite remember, but, no, he did not think that he knew a 
Sergeant Pickle, although it would be nice to know a Sergeant with the same 
last name as his own. 

'What are we going to do?’ Phoebe wailed. 'Prudence will be home any 
minute, and we still don't know which is the right Pickle.' 

'Let's try the busy number and the unanswered one again,’ I said. 

The busy number was still busy. The previously unanswered one rang and 
rang, and just as Phoebe was about to hang up, she heard a voice. ’Hello?’ 
she said. 'May I speak with Sergeant Pickle, please?’ There was a pause as 
she listened. ’He’s still at work?' Phoebe was jumping up and down. ’Thank 
you,’ she said, trying to make her voice serious ’It'll call later, No, no 
message. Thank you.’ 

'Yes!' she said when she hung up. 'Yes, yes, yes!' She was hugging me half 
to death. 'Let's go now,’ she said. 'Quick, before Prudence gets home.' She 
copied the Pickles' address from the phone book and left a note for Prudence 
and her father saying that she and I had gone to the library. 

The Bickles lived three miles from Phoebe's. We took a bus and then 
walked the last half-mile, stopping for directions about thirty times. I 
thought we would never find it, but, at last, we did. The Pickles lived in a 
brick ranch house in a new development. We walked up and down the street. 
There was a light on in the ~ living room, but no car in the driveway. 

'What if Sergeant Pickle drives up and sees us? He might arrest us,’ Phoebe 
said. 'Let's wait over there under those trees'. We sat down on the grass in an 
empty lot several houses away from the Pickles 'Why doesn't someone come 
out?’ Phoebe said. 


A car came around the corner and turned into the Bickles’ drive. ’Oh, lord,' 
Phoebe said. Out of the car trundled Sergeant Pickle. He went into the 



house. We waited another half-hour. 'Rats,' Phoebe said. 'I guess we'll have 
to do Phase Two. You'll have to do it. Tonight.' 

When I got home, my father was pacing around the kitchen. 'Where were 
you? Why didn't you leave a note?' He wanted me to go to Margaret 
Cadaver's with him for dinner. 'I can't.' I said. 'I have tons of home- work, 
and I'll never get it done and—' 

He was disappointed. 'I guess I'll stay home then,' he said. 

'No. you go ahead. Really. I want you to. I'll heat up the leftover spaghetti. 
Really. I'll come: with you next time. I promise.' 

At seven o'clock, I phoned the Bickles. I prayed that Sergeant Bickle 
wouldn't answer, but I was prepared to disguise my voice in case he did. The 
phone rang and rang. I hung up. I rehearsed my voice and what I would say. 

I tried again. On the seventh ring, the phone was answered. It was Sergeant 
Bickle. 

'My name is Susan Longfellow,' I said. 'I'm a friend Of your son's' 

'Oh?' he said. 

'I was wondering if I might speak with him,' I prayed and prayed that he 
had only one son. 

'He isn't here,' Sergeant Bickle said. 'Would you like to leave a message?' 

'Do you know when he might be home?' 

There was a pause. 'How did you say you know my son?' he asked. 

This made me nervous. 'How do I know your son? Well, that's a long story 
-I - basically, the way I know him is - actually, this is a little embarrassing 
to admit'- My hands were sweating so much I could hardly hang onto the 
phone - 'the library, yes, actually, I know him from the library, and he loaned 
me a book, but I've lost the book, and I wanted to-' 


'Maybe you should explain this all to him,' Sergeant Bickle said. 



'Yes, maybe I should do that.' 

'I wonder why he gave you this phone number,' he said. 'I wonder why he 
didn't give you his number at school.' 

'At school? 'Actually, the thing is, I think he did give me that number too, 
but I've lost it. 

'You sure lose a lot of things.' he said. 

'Yes that's me, a real scatter-brain. I — 

'Would you like his number at school?' 

'Yes.' I said. 'Or, better yet, maybe you could give me his address and I'll 
just send him the book. 

'I thought you said you lost the book. 

'Actually yes, but I'm hoping to find it,' I said. 

'I see,' he said. 'Just a minute.' There was a muffled pause as he put his 
hand over the receiver and called, 'Honey, where's Mike's address?' 

Mike! Brilliant! A name! I felt like the Chief Inspector! I felt like I had 
just discovered the most important clue in the criminal investigation of the 
century. To top it off, Sergeant Bickle gave me Mike's address I was sorely 
tempted to end the conversation by informing Sergeant Bickle that his son 
was a potential lunatic, but I refrained. I thanked him and immediately 
phoned Phoebe. 

'You're brilliant!' she said. 'Tomorrow we'll nail Mike the Lunatic.' 

37. The Visit 

The next day, Saturday, when Phoebe and I reached the bus stop, Ben was 
standing there. 'Oh, crud,' Phoebe muttered. 'Are you waiting for this bus? 
Are you going to Chanting Falls?' 


Yup,' he said. 


'To the university?' 


'No.' Ben pushed his hair from his eyes and looked up and down the street. 
'There's a hospital there. I'm going to see someone.' 

'So you're taking this bus,' Phoebe said. 

'Yes, Free Bee, I am taking this bus. Do you mind?' 

The three of us sat on the long bench at the back of the bus. I was in 
between Phoebe and Ben, and his arm pressed up against mine. When Ben 
asked why we were going to Chanting Falls, Phoebe said we were visiting 
an old friend at the university. We rode along with Ben's arm pressing up 
against mine. Each time we rounded a curve, he leaned against me or I 
leaned against him. 'Sorry,' he said. 'Sorry,' I said. 

At Chanting Falls, we stood on the pavement as the bus roared off. 'The 
university is over there...' Ben pointed down the road. 'See ya,' and he 
walked off in the other direction. 

'Oh, lord,' Phoebe said. 'Oh, lord, why did Ben have to be on the same bus? 
It made me very nervous.' 

It made me nervous too, but for different reasons. Every time I was with 
him now, my skin tickled and my brain buzzed and my blood romped 
around as if it was percolating. 

The address we had for Mike Bickle was a freshman dormitory. It was a 
three-storey brick building, with hundreds of windows. 'Oh, no,' Phoebe 
wailed. 'I thought it might be a little house or something.' Students were 
coming in and out of the building and walking across the lawn. Some were 
sitting on the grass or benches, studying. In the lobby was a reception desk, 
with a handsome young man standing behind it. 'You do it,' Phoebe said. 'I 
just can't.' 

I felt as if we stood out like sore thumbs. There were all these grown-up 
college students and here we were, two puny thirteen-year-old girls. Phoebe 
said, 'I wish I had worn something else.' She picked lint off her sweater. 



I explained to the man at the desk that I was looking for my cousin, Mike 
Bickle, and I wasn't sure if he was in this building or not. The young man 
smiled a wide, white smile at me. He was extensively handsome. He 
checked a roster and said, 'You're in the right place. Room 209. You can go 
on up.' 

Phoebe nearly choked. 'You mean girls can go up - you mean we could go 
right up to his room?’ 

’It’s a co-ed dorm,' the young man said. 'Girls live here, too. Sure, you can 
go up. Through there...' he gestured. 

We walked through swinging doors Phoebe said, ’Really, I'm having a 
heart attack, I know it. I can't do this Let’s get out of here.’ At the end of the 
hall, we slipped out the exit. 'I mean, what if we knocked on his door and he 
opened it and pulled us inside and slit our throats?' Phoebe said. 

Students were milling around on the lawn. I looked for an empty bench on 
which we might sit. On the far side of the lawn I saw the backs of two 
people, a young man and an older woman. They were holding hands. She 
turned to him and kissed his cheek. 

'Phoebe-' On the bench was Phoebe's mother, and she was kissing the 
lunatic. 


38. A Kiss 

Phoebe was stunned and angry, but she was braver than I was. She could 
watch, but I could not. I started running. I assumed that Phoebe would flee 
too, but I didn't look back. I tore down the street, trying to remember where 
the bus stop was I did not realize I had passed it until I saw the hospital. I 
ducked inside, and it was only then that I realized that Phoebe was not 
behind me. 

What I did next was an impulse. A hunch. I asked the receptionist if I 
could see Mrs. Finney. She flipped through a roster. 'Are you a family 
member?’ she said. 


'No.' 


'I'm afraid you can't go up then,' she said. ’Mrs. Finney is on the 
Psychiatric Ward. It says "family only" on this list.’ 

'I was looking for her son. He came here to visit her. 

'Maybe they went outside. You could look out back.' 

Behind the hospital was a wide, sloping lawn, bordered by flower gardens 
Scattered across the lawn were benches and chairs, most of them occupied 
with patients and their visitors It was a scene much like the one I had just 
left at the university, except here no one was studying, and some of the 
people wore dressing gowns 

Ben was sitting cross-legged on the ground in front of a woman in a pink 
robe. She fidgeted with the sash. Ben saw me and stood up as I crossed the 
lawn. ’This is my mother, 1 he said. She did not look up. 'Mom. this is 
Salamanca.' She plucked at her sash. I said hello, but she did not look at me. 
Instead, she stood and drifted off across the lawn as if we were not there. 

Ben and I followed. 

She reminded me so much of my mother after she returned from the 
hospital. My mother would stop right in the middle of doing something 
inside the house and walk out the door. Halfway up the hill, she would sit 
down to catch her breath. She picked at the grass, got up again, and went a 
little further. Sometimes my mother went in the bam and filled the pail with 
chicken feed, but before she reached the chicken coop, she set the pail down 
and moved off in another direction. When she could walk farther, my mother 
rambled over the fields and meadows, in a weaving, snaking pattern, as if 
she could not quite make up her mind which way to turn. 

We followed Ben's mother back and forth across the lawn, but she never 
seemed to notice our presence. At last, I said I had to go, and that's when it 
happened. 

For one quick moment we both had the same agenda. I looked at him and 
he looked at me. Both of our heads moved forward. It must have been in 
slow motion, because I had a split second there to be reminded of Mr. 
Birkway’s drawing of the two heads facing each other, with the vase in 
between. I wondered briefly, just for an instant, if a vase could fit between 
us 



If there had been a vase, we would have squashed it, because our heads 
moved completely together and our lips landed in the right place, which was 
on the other person's lips. It was a real kiss, and it did not taste like chicken. 

And then our heads moved slowly backward and we stared out across the 
lawn, and I felt like the newlY born horse who knows nothing but feels 
everything. 

Ben touched his lips 'Did it taste a little like black- berries to you?' he said. 

39. Spit 

At this point in my story, Gram interrupted. 'Oh, yes, yes, yes!' she said. 
'I've been waiting for that kiss for days I do like a story with some good 
kisses in 

'She's such a gooseberry,' Gramps said. 

We were churning through Montana. I didn't dare check our progress on 
the map. I didn't want to discover that we couldn't make it in time. I thought 
that if I kept talking, and praying underneath, and if we kept moving along 
those mountainous roads, we had a chance. 

Gram said, 'But, what about Peeby? What about her mother kissing the 
lunatic? I didn't like that kiss very much. It was the other one I liked - the 
one with Ben. 

When I left the hospital, I debated retracing my steps and returning to the 
university in search of Phoebe. I decided to find the bus stop first and then 
see if I was feeling brave enough to go on, but when I did reach the bus stop, 
there was Phoebe, sitting on the bench. 

'Well?' I said. 'What happened?' 

'Where were you?' 

I did not tell her about seeing Ben or his mother. I wanted to, but I 
couldn't. 'I was afraid, Phoebe. I couldn't stay there. 


'And I thought you were the brave one,’ she said. 'Oh, well, it doesn't 
matter. Nothing matters. I'm sick of it.’ 

'What happened?’ 

'Nothing. They sat there on the bench having a gay old time. If I could toss 
rocks like you can toss rocks, I'd have plonked them both in the back of the 
head. Did you notice her hair? She’s cut it. It's short. And do you know what 
my mother did? In the middle of talking, she leaned over and spit on the 
grass. Spit! It was disgusting. And the lunatic, do you know what he did 
when she spit? He laughed. Then he leaned over and he spit.’ 

'Why would they do that?’ 

'Who knows? I'm sick of it. My mother can stay there for all I care. She 
doesn't need me. She doesn't need any of us.’ 

Phoebe was like that all the way home on the bus. She was in an 
extensively black mood. I did not tell her about Ben. We got back to 
Phoebe's house just as her father pulled in the driveway. Prudence rushed 
out of the house saying, 'She called, she called, she called!' 

'Who called?' Mr. Winterbottom said. 

Prudence was beside herself. Mom, of course. Just ten minutes ago. She’s 
coming home.' 

'Terrific,' Phoebe muttered. 

'What was that, Phoebe?’ her father said. 

’Nothing.’ 

'She's coming tomorrow,’ Prudence said. 'But—' 

'What’s wrong?' her father said. 'What else did she say?’ 

Prudence twisted a strand of hair around her finger. 'She sounded a bit 
nervous. She wanted to talk with you—' 



'Did she leave a number? I'll call her back— 

'No, she didn't leave any number. She said to tell you not to make any pre- 
judgements.' 

'What is that supposed to mean?' her father said. 'Not make any pre- 
judgements about what?' 

'I don't honestly know,' Prudence said. 'Mom said, "Tell your father not to 
make any pre-judgements. We will have to talk when I get home." And, oh! 
Most, most, important! She said that she was bringing some- one with her. 

'Oh, that's just grand,' Phoebe said. 'Just grand.' 

'Phoebe-?' her father said. 'Prudence - did she say who she is bringing?' 

'I honestly could not say.' 

'Prudence, are you exactly sure that is all she said? Did she refer to this 
person at all? Did she mention a name?' He was getting agitated. 

'Why, no,' Prudence said. 'She didn't mention a name. She just said that she 
was bringing him with her. 

'Him?' 

Phoebe looked at me. 'Cripes,' she said, and she went into the house, 
slamming the door behind her. 

I couldn't believe it. Wasn't she going to tell her father what she had seen? 

I was bursting at the seams to tell my own father, but when I got home, he 
and Margaret were sitting on the porch. 

'Oh, Sal,' Margaret said. 'My brother told me you're in his English class. 
What a surprise.' She must have already told my father this, because he 
didn't look too surprised. 'He's a terrific teacher. Do you like him?' 


'I suppose.' I didn't want to talk about it. I wanted Margaret to vanish. 



I had to wait until she went home to tell my father about Phoebe's mother, 
and when I did tell him, all he said was, ’So, Mrs. Winterbottom is coming 
home. That’s good. Then he went over to the window and stared out of it for 
the longest time, and I knew he was thinking about my mother. 

All that night I thought about Phoebe and Prudence and Mr. Winterbottom. 
It seemed like their whole world was going to fall apart the next day when 
Mrs. Winterbottom walked in all cuddly with the lunatic. 

40. Homecoming 

The next morning, Phoebe phoned, begging me to come over. ’I can’t stand 
it,’ she said. 'I want a witness' 

’For what?' 

’I just want a witness' 

’Did you tell your father? About your mother and—’ ’Are you kidding?' 
Phoebe said. 'You should see him. He and Prudence spent all last night and 
this morning cleaning the house. 'They've scrubbed floors and bathrooms, 
they dusted like fiends, they did ever so much laundry and ironing, and they 
vacuumed. 'Then, they took a good look around. My father said, "Maybe it 
looks too good. Your mother will think we can function without her." So 
they messed things up a little. He is very put out with me that I wouldn't 
help.’ 

I tried to think of a good reason why I could not go to Phoebe's I did not 
want to be a witness to anything, but, in the end, I felt guilty for running 
away the day before, and so I agreed.. When I got to her house, Phoebe, Mr. 
Winterbottom and Prudence were sitting there staring at each other. 

'Didn't she say what time she was coming?' Mr. Winterbottom asked. 

Prudence said, 'No, she did not, and I wish you would quit acting as if it is 
my fault that she did not say more than she did.' 

Mr. Winterbottom was a wreck. He jumped up to straighten a pillow, sat 
back down, and then he leaped up to mess up the pillow again. He went out 
in the yard and walked around in circles. He changed his shirt twice. 


'I hope you don't mind that I am here,’ I said. 


'Why would I mind?’ Mr. Winterbottom said. 

Just as I thought they would ah go stark raving mad, a taxi pulled up 
outside. 'I can’t look,’ Mr. Winterbottom said, escaping to the kitchen. 

'I can't look either,’ Phoebe said. She followed her father, and I followed 
Phoebe. 

'Well, gosh,’ Prudence said. 'I don't know what has gotten into everybody. 
Aren't you excited to see her?' 

From the kitchen, we heard Prudence open the front door. We heard Mrs. 
Winterbottom say, 'Oh, sweetie— Mr. Winterbottom wiped the kitchen 
counter. We heard Prudence gasp and her mother say, Td like you to meet 
Mike.’ 

'Mike?' Mr. Winterbottom said. He was quite red in the face. I was glad 
there was no axe in the house or I am fairly certain he would have picked it 
up and headed straight for Mike. 

Phoebe said, 'Now, Dad, don’t do anything too rash—' 

'Mike?' he repeated. 

Mrs. Winterbottom called, 'George? Phoebe?’ We heard her say to 
Prudence, 'Where are they? Didn't you tell them we were coming?’ 

Mr. Winterbottom took a deep breath. He said, 'Phoebe, I'm not sure you 
or Sal should be around for this' 

'Are you kidding?’ Phoebe said. He took another deep breath. ’OK,' he said. 
'OK. Here we go.' He stood up straight and tall and walked through to the 
living room. Phoebe and I followed. 

Honest and truly, I think Phoebe nearly fainted dead away on the carpet. 
There were two reasons for this The first one was that Mrs. Winterbottom 
looked different. Her hair was not only short but also quite stylish. She was 



wearing lipstick, mascara and a little blush on her cheeks, and her clothes 
were altogether unlike anything I had ever seen her in: a white T-shirt, blue 
jeans, and flat black shoes Dangling from her ears were thin silver hoop 
earrings She looked magnificent, but she did not look like Phoebe's mother. 

The second reason that I think Phoebe nearly fainted dead away was that 
there was Mike Bickle, Phoebe's potential lunatic, in her own living room. It 
was one thing to think he was coming, and another thing to actually see him 
standing there. 

I didn't know what to think. For a second, I thought maybe Mike had 
kidnapped Mrs. Winterbottom and was bringing her back for some ransom 
money or maybe he was now going to do away with the rest of us But I kept 
thinking of seeing them together the day before, and besides, Mrs. 
Winterbottom looked too terrific to have been held captive. Mrs. 
Winterbottom did look a little frightened, but not of Mike. She seemed 
afraid of her husband. 

'Dad,' Phoebe whispered, 'that’s the lunatic.’ 

’Oh, Phoebe,' her mother said, pressing her fingers to her cheek, and when 
she made that familiar gesture, Phoebe looked as if her heart was splitting 
into a thou- sand pieces. Mrs. Winterbottom hugged Phoebe, but Phoebe did 
not hug her back. 

Mr. Winterbotttom said, 'Norma, I hope you are going to explain exactly 
what is going on here.' He was trying to make his voice firm, but it trembled. 

Prudence stood there, staring at Mike. She seemed to find him quite 
handsome and was flirting with him. She fluffed her hair away from her 
neck. 

Mrs. Winterbottom went up to Mr. Winterbottom and tried to put her arms 
around him, but he pulled away. 'I think we deserve an explanation,' he said. 
He was staring at Mike. 

So was 1. 1 was quite confused. Was she in love with Mike? And, if she 
was in love with him, he seemed awfully, awfully young. He didn't seem 
much older than Prudence. 



Mrs. Winterbottom sat down on the sofa and began to cry. It was a terrible, 
terrible moment. It was thumpingly hard to make any sense out of what she 
said at first. She was talking about being respectable and how maybe Mr. 
Winterbottom would never forgive her, but she was tired of being so 
respectable. She said she had tried very, very hard all these years to be 
perfect, but that she had to admit she was quite imperfect. She said there was 
something that she had never told her husband, and she feared he would not 
forgive her for it. 

Mr. Winterbottom's hands were trembling. He did not say anything. Mrs. 
Winterbottom motioned for Mike to join her on the sofa. Mr. Winterbottom 
cleared his throat several times, but still he said nothing. 

Mrs. Winterbottom said, 'This is my son.' 

I think that Mr. Winterbottom, Prudence, Phoebe and I all said at exactly 
the same time, 'Your son?' 

Mrs. Winterbottom stared at her husband. 'George,' she said, 'I know you 
will think I am not - or was not - respectable, but it was before I met you, 
and I had to give him up for adoption and I could hardly bear to think of it 
and—' 

Mr. Winterbottom said. 'Respectable? Respectable? The hell with 
respectable!' Mr. Winterbottom did not normally swear. 

Mrs. Winterbottom stood up. 'Mike found me, and at first I was frightened 
of what that would mean. I’ve lived such a tiny life — 

Phoebe took her father's hand. 

'-And I had to go away and sort things out. I haven't yet met Mike's 
adoptive parents, but Mike and I have spent a lot of time talking, and I've 
been thinking—' 

Mike sat there looking down at his feet. 

'Are you going to leave?' Mr. Winterbottom asked. 


Mrs. Winterbottom looked as if he had slapped her. 'Leave?' she said. 



'Again, I mean,’ Mr. Winterbottom said. 


'Only if you want me to,’ she said. 'Only if you cannot live with such an 
unrespectable— 

’I said to hell with respectable!' Mr. Winterbottom said. 'What’s all this 
about respectable? It’s not respect- able I'm concerned about. I'm more 
concerned that you couldn't - or wouldn't - tell me about any of this.’ 

Mike stood up. 'I knew it wouldn't work,' he said. 

Mr. Winterbottom said, 'I have nothing against you, Mike - 1 just don't 
know you.’ He looked at his wife. 'I don't think I know you, either. 

I was wishing I was invisible. I stared out the window at the leaves falling 
to the ground, and I was infinitely sad, sad down to my bones. I was sad for 
Phoebe and her parents and Prudence and Mike, I was sad for the leaves that 
were dying, and I was sad for myself, for something I had lost. 

I saw Mrs. Partridge out front, standing on Phoebe's front walk. 

Mr. Winterbottom said, 'I think we all need to sit down and talk. Maybe 
we can sort something out. Then he did what I think was a noble thing. He 
went over to Mike and shook his hand and said, 'I did always think a son 
would be a nice addition to this family. 

Mrs. Winterbottom looked extensively relieved. Prudence smiled at Mike. 
Phoebe stood quite still off to the side. 

'I'd better go,' I said. 

Everyone turned to me as if I had just dropped through the roof. Mr. 
Winterbottom said, ’Sal, oh, I am sorry, I truly am.' To Mike, he said, 'Sal is 
like another member of the family. 

Mrs. Winterbottom went over to Phoebe. 'You're mad at me, aren't you, 
Phoebe?’ 



'Yes,' Phoebe said. 'I most certainly am.' Phoebe took my sleeve and pulled 
me toward the door. She turned back around to say, 'When you all decide 
exactly how many people are in this family, let me know.' 

Phoebe pulled me out on the porch, just as Mrs. Partridge placed a white 
envelope on the steps. 


41. The Gifts 

It seemed fitting that at this point in my story of Phoebe, Gramps called 
out, 'I-dee-ho!' We were high in the mountains and had just crossed the 
Montana border into Idaho. For the first time, I believed we were going to 
make it to Lewiston by the next day, the twentieth of August, my mother's 
birthday. 

Gramps suggested we press on to Coeur d'Alene, about an hour away, 
where we could spend the night. From there, Lewiston was about a hundred 
miles due south, an easy morning's journey. 'Flow does that sound to you, 
gooseberry?' Gram was sitting, motionless with her head resting against the 
back of the seat and her hands folded in her lap. 'Gooseberry?' 

When Gram spoke, you could hear the rattle in her chest. 'Oh, that's fine,' 
she said. 

'Gooseberry, are you feeling OK?' 

'I'm a little tired,' she said. 

'We'll get you to a bed real soon.' Gramps glanced back at me, and I could 
see that he was troubled. 

'Gram, if you want to stop now, that would be OK,' I said. 

'Oh, no,' she said. 'I'd like to sleep in Coeur d'Alene tonight. Your momma 
sent us a postcard from Coeur d'Alene, and on it was a beautiful blue lake.' 
She coughed a long, rattly cough. 

Gramps said, 'OK then, beautiful blue lake, here we come.' 


Gram said, 'I'm so glad Peeby’s momma came home. I wish your momma 
could come home too.’ 

Gramps nodded his head for about five minutes. Then he handed me a 
tissue and said, ’Tell us about Mrs. Partridge. What was she doing leaving a 
gol-dang envelope on Peeby’s porch?’ 

That’s what Phoebe and I wanted to know. When we stepped out the door, 
Mrs. Partridge tilted her head up at us. 

’Did you want something, Mrs. Partridge?’ I asked. 

She put her hand to her lips ’Hmm,’ she said. 

Phoebe snatched the envelope and ripped it open. She read the message 
aloud: 'Don’t judge a man until you've walked two moons in his moccasins.' 

Mrs. Partridge turned to go. ’Bye-bye,' she said. 

’Mrs. Partridge,' Phoebe called. 'We've already had this one. 

'I beg your pardon?' Mrs. Partridge said. 

'It was you, wasn't it?' Phoebe said. 'You've been creeping around leaving 
these things, haven't you?' 

'Did you like them?' Mrs. Partridge said. As she stood there in the middle 
of the sidewalk, with her head tilted up at us, and that quizzical look on her 
face, she looked like a mischievous child. 'Margaret reads them to me from 
the paper each day, and when there is a nice one, I ask her to copy it down. 
I'm sorry I gave you that one about the moccasins already. My noggin 
forgot.' 

'But, why did you bring them here?' Phoebe said. 

'I thought they would be grandiful surprises for you - like fortune cookies 
only I didn't have any cookies to put them in. Did you like them, anyway?' 

Phoebe looked at me for a long minute. Then she went down the steps and 
said, 'Mrs. Partridge, when was it you met my brother?' 



'You said you didn't have a brother,' Mrs. Partridge said. 


'I know, but you said you met him. When was that?' 

She tapped her head. 'Noggin, remember. Let's see. Some time ago. A 
week? 'Two weeks? He came to my house by mistake, I suppose. He let me 
feel his face. That's why I thought he was your brother. He has a similar 
face. Isn't that peculible?’ 

Phoebe looked back toward her house. She said,' No more peculible than 
most things lately.’ 

Mrs. Partridge tottered on down the walk and back to her house. 

Phoebe stood there looking all around. 'It's a peculible world, Sal,’ she 
said, and then she walked across the grass and spit into the street. She said, 
'Come on, try it. 1 1 spit into the street. 'What do you think?’ Phoebe said. We 
spit again. 

It might sound thumpingly disgusting, but to tell the truth, we got a great 
deal of pleasure from those spits. I doubt if I ever could explain why that 
was, but for some reason it seemed the perfect thing to do, and when Phoebe 
turned around and went into the house, I knew that that was the right thing 
for her to do, too. 

With the courage of that spit in me, I went to see Margaret Cadaver, arid 
we had a long talk and that’s when I found out how she met my father. It was 
painful to talk with her, and I even cried in front of her, but afterwards I 
understood why my father liked to be with her. 

Ben was sitting on my front steps when I got home. I was extensively glad 
to see him. He said, 'I brought you something. It’s out back.' He led me 
around the side of the house and there, strutting across that little patch of 
grass, was a chicken. I was never in my life so happy to see a chicken. 

Ben said, 'I named it, but you can change the name if you want.' When I 
asked him what its name was, he leaned forward and I leaned forward and 
another kiss happened, a spectacular kiss, an extensively perfect kiss, and 
Ben said, 'Its name is Blackberry' 



'Oh,' Gram said, ’is that the end of the Peeby story?’ 

'Yes’ I said. That wasn't quite true, I suppose, as I could have told more. I 
could have told about Phoebe getting adjusted to having a brother, and 
Phoebe getting adjusted to her 'new' mother, and ail of that, but that part was 
still going on, even as we travelled through the mountains. It was a whole 
different story. 

'Well, I liked that story about Peeby, and I'm glad it wasn't too awfully sad, 
and I think you should write it down some day.’ 

Gram closed her eyes and for the next hour as Gramps drove toward Coeur 
d'Alene, he and I listened to her rattly breathing. I watched her lying there so 
still, so calm. 'Gramps' I whispered. 'She looks a little gray, doesn't she?’ 

'Yes, she does, chickabiddy, yes, she does' He stepped on the gas and we 
raced toward Coeur d'Alene. 


42. The Overlook 

At Coeur d'Alene, we went straight to the hospital. Gramps had tried to 
wake Gram when he saw the lake. 'Gooseberry?' Gramps said. She slumped 
sideways on the seat. 'Gooseberry?' 

The doctors said Gram had had a stroke. Gramps insisted on being with 
Gram while she underwent tests an intern had tried to dissuade him. 'She's 
unconscious' the intern said. 'She won’t know whether you're here or not.' 

'Sonny, I've been by her side for fifty-one years, except for three days 
when she left me for the egg man. I’m holding on to her hand, see? If you 
want me to let go, you'll have to chop my hand off 

They let him stay with her. While I was waiting in the lobby, a man came 
in with an old beagle. The receptionist told him he would have to leave the 
dog outside. 'By herself?’ the man said. 

I said, 'I'll watch her. I had a dog just like her once.' I took the old beagle 
outside. I sat down on the grass and the beagle put her head in my lap and 
murmured in that special way dogs have. Gramps calls it a dog's purr. 


I started wondering if Gram's snake bite had anything to do with her 
stroke, and then I wondered if Gramps felt guilty for whizzing off the 
highway and stopping at that river. If we hadn't gone to that river, Gram 
would never have been bitten by that snake. And then I started thinking 
about my mother's stillborn baby and maybe if I hadn't climbed that tree and 
if my mother hadn't carried me, maybe the baby would have lived and my 
mother never would have gone away, and everything would still be as it 
used to be. 

But as I sat thinking these things, it occurred to me a person couldn't stay 
ah locked up in the house like Phoebe and her mother had tried to do at first. 
A person had to go out and do things and see things, and I wondered, for the 
first time, if this had something to do with Gram and Gramps taking me on 
this trip. 

The beagle in my lap was just like our Moody Blue. I rubbed her head and 
prayed for Gram. I thought about Moody Blue's first litter of puppies. 

For the first week, Moody Blue would not let anyone come anywhere near 
those puppies She licked them clean and nuzzled them. They squealed and 
pawed their way up to her with their eyes still sealed. They stumbled about 
and she nudged them against her belly so that they could nurse. 

Gradually, Moody Blue let us touch the puppies, but she kept her sharp 
eyes on us, and if we tried to take a puppy out of her sight, she growled. 
Within a few weeks, the puppies were stumbling away from her, and Moody 
Blue spent her days herding them back, but when they were about six weeks 
old, Moody Blue started ignoring them. She snapped at them and pushed 
them away. I told my mother that Moody Blue was being terrible. 'She hates 
her puppies' 

'It's not terrible,' my mother said. 'It's normal. She’s weaning them from 
her. 

'Does she have to do that? Why can't they stay with her?’ 

'It isn't good for her or for them. I suppose they have to become 
independent. What if something happened to Moody Blue? They wouldn't 
know how to survive without her. 



While I prayed for Gram outside the hospital, 1 wondered if my mother's 
trip to Idaho was like Moody Blue's behaviour. Maybe part of it was for my 
mother and part of it was for me. 

When the beagle's owner returned, I went back inside. It was after 
midnight when a nurse told me I could see Gram. She was lying, still and 
gray, on the bed. A little dribble was coming out of one side of her mouth. 
Gramps was leaning over her, whispering in her ear. A nurse said, 'I don't 
think she can hear you.' 

'Of course she can hear me,' Gramps said. 'She'll always be able to hear 
me.' 


Gram's eyes were closed. Wires were attached to her chest and to a 
monitor, and a tube was taped to her hand. I wanted to hold her and wake 
her up. Gramps said, 'We're gonna be here awhile, chickabiddy.' He reached 
in his pockets and pulled out his car keys 'Here, in case you need anything 
from the car.' He handed me a crumpled wad of money. 'In case you need it.' 

'I don't want to leave Gram,' I said. 

'Heck,' he said. 'She doesn't want you sitting around this old hospital. You 
just whisper in her ear if you want to tell her anything, and then you go do 
what you have to do. We're not going anywhere, your grandmother and I. 
We'll be right here.' He winked at me. 'You be careful, chickabiddy.' 

I leaned over and whispered in Gram's ear and then I left. In the car, I 
studied the map, leaned back in the seat, and closed my eyes. Gramps knew 
what I was going to do. 

The key was cold in my hand. I studied the map again. One curvy road ran 
direct from Coeur d'Alene to Lewiston. I started the car, backed it up, drove 
around the parking lot, stopped, and turned off the engine. I counted the 
money in my pocket and looked at the map once more. 

In the course of a lifetime, there were some things that mattered. 


Although I was terrified when I backed the car out of the parking lot, once 
I was on the highway, I felt better. I drove slowly, and I knew how to do it. I 



prayed to every passing tree, and there were a thumping lot of trees along the 
way. 

It was a narrow, winding road, without traffic. It took me four hours to 
drive the hundred miles from Coeur d'Alene to the top of Lewiston Hill - 
which, to me, was more of a mountain than a hill. I pulled into the overlook 
at the top. In the valley far below was Lewis- ton, with the Snake River 
winding through it. Between me and Lewiston was the treacherous road with 
its hairpin turns that twisted back and forth down the mountain. 

I peered over the rail, looking for the bus that I knew was still somewhere 
down there on the side of the mountain, but I could not see it. 'I can do this,’ 

I said to myself over and over. 'I can do this’ 

I eased the car onto the road. At the first curve, my heart started thumping. 
My palms were sweating and slippery on the wheel. I crept along with my 
foot on the brake, but the road doubled back so sharply and plunged so 
steeply that even with my foot on the brake, the car was going faster than I 
wanted it to. When I came out of that curve, I was in the outside lane, the 
one nearest to the side of the cliff. It was a sharp drop down, with only a thin 
cable strung between occasional posts to mark the edge of the road. 

Back and forth across the hill the road snaked. For a half mile, I was on the 
inside against the hill and felt safer, and then I came to one of those awful 
curves, and for the next half mile I was on the outside, and the dark slide of 
the hillside stretched down, down, down. Back and forth I went: a half mile 
safe, a curve, a half mile edging the side of the cliff. 

Halfway down was another overlook, a thin extra lane marked off less as 
an opportunity to gaze at the scenery, I thought, than to allow drivers a 
chance to stop and gather their wits. I wondered how many people had 
abandoned their cars at this point and walked the remaining miles down. As 
I stood looking over the side, another car pulled into the overlook. A man 
got out and stood near me, smoking a cigarette. 'Where are the others?’ he 
asked. 

'What others?’ 


'Whoever's with you. Whoever's driving.' 



'Oh,' I said. 'Around... 


'Taking a pee, eh?' he said, referring, I gathered, to whoever was 
supposedly with me. 'A helluva road to be driving at night, isn't it? I do it 
every night. I work up in Pullman and live down there...' He pointed to the 
lights of Lewiston and the black river. 'You been here before?' he said. 

'No.' 

'See that?' He pointed to a spot somewhere below. 

I peered into the darkness. Then I saw the severed tree-tops and the rough 
path cut through the brush. At the end of this path I could see something 
shiny and metallic reflecting the moonlight. It was one thing I had been 
looking for. 

'A bus went off the road here - a year or more ago,' he said. 'Skidded right 
there, coming out of that last turn, and went sliding into this here overlook 
and on through the railing and rolled over and over into those trees. A 
helluva thing. When I came home that night, rescuers were still hacking their 
way through the brush to get to it. Only one person survived, ya know?' 

I knew. 


43. The Bus and the Willow 

When the map drove off, I crawled beneath the railing and made my way 
down the hill toward the bus In the east the sky was smokey gray, and I was 
glad for the approaching dawn. In the year and a half since the trail was 
hacked out, the brush had begun to grow back. Wet with dew, straggly 
branches slapped and scratched at my legs and hid uneven ground so that 
several times I tripped, tumbling and sliding downwards 

The bus lay on its side like an old sick horse, its broken headlights staring 
out mournfully into the surrounding trees Most of the huge rubber tyres were 
punctured and grotesquely twisted on their axles I climbed up onto the bus's 
side, hoping to make my way down to an open window, but there were two 
enormous gashes torn into the side, and the jagged metal was peeled back 
like a sardine tin. Through a smashed window behind the driver's seat, I 


could see jumbled mess of twisted seats and chunks of foam rubber. 
Everything was dusted over with fuzzy, green mould. 

I had imagined that I would drop through a window and walk down the 
aisle, but there was no space inside to move. I had wanted to scour every 
inch of the bus, looking for something - anything - that might be familiar. I 
climbed back down off the bus and walked all the way around it. Sticking 
out from beneath the side of the bus was a man's boot, an open gash in the 
side of it revealing that, thankfully, there was no foot inside it. 

By now the sky was pale pink, and it was easier to find the uphill trail, but 
harder going as it was a steep incline. By the time I reached the top, I was 
muddy and scratched from head to toe. It wasn't until I had crawled beneath 
the railing that I noticed the car parked behind Gramps' red Chevrolet. 

It was the Sheriff. He was talking on his radio when he saw me, and he 
motioned for his deputy to get out. The deputy said, 'We were just about to 
come down there after you. We saw you up on top of the bus. You kids 
ought to know better. What were you doing down there at this time of day, 
anyway?’ 

Before I could answer, the Sheriff climbed out of his car. He settled his 
gray hat on his head and shifted his holster. 'Where are the others?’ he said. 

'There aren't any others' I said. 

'Who brought you up here?’ 

'I brought myself.' 

'Whose car is this?’ 

'My grandfather’s’ 

'And where is he?’ The Sheriff glanced to left and right, as if Gramps 
might be hiding in the bushes 

'He's in Coeur d'Alene.' 


The Sheriff said, 'I beg your pardon?' 



So I told him about Gram and about how Gramps had to stay with her and 
about how I had driven from Coeur d'Alene very carefully. 


The Sheriff said, 'Now, let me get this straight,’ and he repeated everything 
I said, ending with, ’and you're telling me that you drove from Coeur d'Alene 
to this spot on this hill all by yourself?' 

'Extensively carefully,' I said. 'My Gramps taught me how to drive, and he 
taught me to drive extensively carefully.' 

The Sheriff looked at the deputy and said, 'I am afraid to ask this young 
lady exactly how old she is. Why don't you ask her?' 

The deputy said, 'How old are you?' I told him. 

The Sheriff gave me a thumpingly stern look and said, 'I don't suppose you 
would mind telling me exactly what was so all-fired important that you 
couldn't wait for someone with a legitimate driver's license to bring you to 
the fair city of Lewiston?' 

And so I told him all the rest. When I had finished, he returned to his car 
and talked into his radio some more. Then he told me to get in his car and he 
told the deputy to follow in Gramps' car. I thought the Sheriff was probably 
going to put me in jail, and it wasn't the thought of jail that bothered me so 
much. It was knowing that I was this close and might not be able to do what 
I had come to do, and it was knowing that I needed to get back to Gram. 

He did not take me to jail, however. He drove across the bridge into 
Lewiston and on through the city and up a hill. He drove into Longwood, 
stopped at the caretaker's house, and went inside. Behind us was the deputy 
in Gramps’ car. The caretaker came out and pointed off to the right, and the 
Sheriff got back in the car and drove off in that direction. 

It was a pleasant place. The Snake River curved behind this section, and 
tall, full-leaved trees grew here and there across the lawn. The Sheriff 
parked the car and led me up a path toward the river, and there, on a little 
hill overlooking the river and the valley, was my mother's grave. 



On the tombstone, beneath her name and the dates of her birth and death, 
was an engraving of a maple tree, and it was only then, when I saw the stone 
and her name - Chanhassen 'Sugar' Pickford Hiddle - and the engraving of 
the tree, that I knew, by myself and for myself, that she was not coming 
back. I asked if I could sit there for a little while, because I wanted to 
memorize the place. I wanted to memorize the grass and the trees, the smells 
and the sounds 

In the midst of the still morning, with only the sound of the river gurgling 
by, I heard a bird. It was singing a birdsong, a true, sweet birdsong. I looked 
all around and then up into the willow that leaned toward the river. The 
birdsong came from the top of the willow and I did not want to look too 
closely, because I wanted it to be the tree that was singing. 

I went up and kissed the willow. 'Happy birthday,’ I said. 

In the Sheriff's car, I said, 'She isn't actually gone at all. She's singing in 
the trees' 

'Whatever you say, Miss Salamanca Hiddle.' 

'You can take me to jail now.' 

44. Our Gooseberry 

Instead of taking me to jail, the Sheriff drove me to Coeur d'Alene, with 
the deputy following us in Cramps' car. The Sheriff gave me a lengthy and 
severe lecture about driving without a license, and he made me promise that 
I would not drive again until I was sixteen. 

'Not even on Cramps' farm?' I said. 

He looked straight ahead at the road. 'I suppose people are going to do 
whatever they want to on their own farms' he said, 'as long as they have a lot 
of room to maneuver and as long as they are not endangering the lives of any 
other persons or animals. But, I'm not saying you ought to. I'm not giving 
you permission or anything.' 

I asked him to tell me about the bus accident. I asked him if he had been 
there that night and if he had seen anyone brought out of the bus 


He said, 'You don't want to know all that. A person shouldn't have to think 
about those things' 


'Did you see my mother?' 

'I saw a lot of people, Salamanca, and maybe I saw your mother and 
maybe I didn't, but I'm sorry to say that if I did see her, I didn't know it. I 
remember your father coming in to the station. I do remember that, but I 
wasn't with him when - 1 wasn't there when—’ 

'Did you see Mrs. Cadaver?' I said. 

'How do you know about Mrs. Cadaver?' he said. 'Of course I saw Mrs. 
Cadaver. Everyone saw Mrs. Cadaver. Nine hours after that bus rolled over, 
as all those stretchers were being carried up the hill, and everyone 
despairing, there was her hand coming up out of the window and everyone 
was shouting because there it was, a moving hand.' He glanced at me. 'I wish 
it had been your mother's hand. 

'Mrs. Cadaver was sitting next to my mother,’ I: said. 


'Oh.' 


'They were strangers to each other when they got on that bus, but, by the 
time they got off, six days later, they were friends. My mother told Mrs. 
Cadaver all about me and my father and our farm in Bybanks. She told Mrs. 
Cadaver about the fields and the blackberries and Moody Blue and the 
chickens and the singing tree. I think that if she told Mrs. Cadaver all that, 
then my mother must have been missing us, don't you think?’ 

'I'm sure of it,’ the Sheriff said. 'And, how do you know all this?’ 

So I explained to him how Mrs. Cadaver had told me all this on the day 
Phoebe's mother returned. Mrs. Cadaver told me about how my father 
visited her in the hospital in Lewiston after he had buried my mother. He 
came to see the only survivor from the bus crash, and when he learned that 
Mrs. Cadaver had been sitting next to my mother, they started talking about 
her. They talked for six hours. 



Mrs. Cadaver told me about her and my father writing to each other, and 
about how my father needed to get away from Bybanks for a while. I asked 
Mrs. Cadaver why my father hadn't told me how he had met her, and she 
said he had tried, but I didn't want to hear it, and he didn't want to upset me. 
He thought I might dislike Margaret because she had survived and my 
mother had not. 

'Do you love him?' I had asked Mrs. Cadaver. 'Are you going to marry 
him?’ 


'Goodness!' she said. 'It's a little early for that. He is holding on to me 
because I was with your mother and held her hand in her last moments. Your 
father isn't ready to love anyone else yet. Your mother was one of a kind.' 

That's true. She was. 

And even though Mrs. Cadaver had told me all this and had told me how 
she had been with my mother in her last minutes, I still did not believe that 
my mother was actually dead. I still thought that there might have been a 
mistake. I don't know what I had hoped to find in Lewiston. Maybe I 
expected that I would see her walking through a field and I would call to her 
and she would say 'Oh, Salamanca, my left arm,’ and 'Oh, Salamanca, take 
me home.’ 

I slept for the last fifty miles into Coeur d'Alene and when I awoke, I was 
sitting in the Sheriffs car outside the hospital entrance. The Sheriff was 
coming out of the hospital He handed me an envelope and slid in beside me 
on the seat. 

In the envelope was a note from Gramps giving the name of the motel he 
was staying at. Beneath that he had written, 'I am sorry to say that our 
gooseberry died at three o'clock this morning.' 

Gramps was sitting on the side of the bed in the motel, talking on the 
telephone. When he saw me and the Sheriff at the door, he put the phone 
down and hugged me to him. The Sheriff told Gramps how sorry he was and 
that he didn't think it was the time or place to give anybody a lecture about 
underage grand- daughters driving down a mountainside in the middle of the 
night. He handed Gramps his car keys and asked Gramps if he needed help 
making any arrangements 



Gramps said he had taken care of most things. Gram's body was being 
down back to Bybanks, where my father would meet the plane. Gramps and 
I were going to finish what had to be done in Coeur d'Alene and leave the 
next morning. 

After the Sheriff and his deputy left, I noticed Gram's and Gramps' open 
suitcase. Inside were Gram's things, all mixed in with Gramps' clothes I 
picked up her baby powder and smelled it. On the desk was a crumpled 
letter. When Gramps saw me look at it, he said, 'I wrote her a letter last 
night. It’s a love letter. Gramps lay down on the bed and stared up at the 
ceiling. ’Chickabiddy,' he said, 'I miss my gooseberry' He put one arm over 
his eyes His other hand patted the empty space beside him. 'This ain't...' he 
said. 'This ain't—' 


'It's OK,' I said. I sat down on the other side of the bed and held his hand. 
'This ain't your marriage bed.' 

About five minutes later, Gramps cleared his throat and said, 'But it will 
have to do.' 


45. Bybanks 

We're back in Bybanks now. My father and I are living on our farm again, 
and Gramps is living with us. Gram is buried in the aspen grove where she 
and Gramps were married. We miss our gooseberry every single day. 

Lately, I've been wondering if there might be some- thing hidden behind 
the fireplace, because, just as the fireplace was behind the plaster wall and 
my mother's story was behind Phoebe's, I think there was a third story 
behind Phoebe's and my mother's, and that was about Gram and Gramps. 

On the day after Gram was buried, her friend Gloria - the one Gram 
thought was so much like Phoebe, and the one who had a hankering for 
Gramps - came to visit Gramps They sat on our porch while Gramps talked 
about Gram for four hours straight. Gloria came in our kitchen and asked if 
we had any aspirin. She had a thumpingly grand headache. We haven't seen 
her since. 


I wrote to Tom Fleet, the boy who helped Gram when the snake took a 
snack out of her leg. I told him that Gram made it back to Bybanks, but 
unfortunately she came in a coffin. I described the aspen grove where she 
was buried and told him about the river nearby. He wrote back, saying that 
he was sorry about Gram and maybe he would come and visit that aspen 
grove some day. Then he said, 'Is your riverbank private property?’ 

Gramps is giving me more driving lessons in the pick-up truck. We 
practice over on Gramps' old farm, where the new owner lets us clonk 
around on the dirt roads with us rides Gramps' new beagle puppy, which he 
named Huzza Huzza. Gramps pets the puppy and smokes his pipe as I drive, 
and we both play the moccasin game. It is a game we made up on our way 
back from Idaho. We take turns pretending we are walking in someone else's 
moccasins 

'If I was walking in Peeby's moccasins, I would be jealous of a new brother 
dropping out of the sky.' 

'If I was in Gram's moccasins right this minute, I would want to cool my 
feet in that river over there.' 

'If I was walking in Ben's moccasins, 1 would miss Salamanca Hiddle.' 

On and on we go. We walk in everybody's moccasins, and we have 
discovered some interesting things that way. One day I realized that our 
whole trip out to Lewiston had been a gift from Gram and Gramps to me. 
They were giving me a chance to walk in my mother's moccasins - to see 
what she had seen and feel what she might have felt on her last trip. 

And, another afternoon, after we had been talking about Prometheus 
stealing fire from the sun to give to man, and about Pandora opening up the 
forbidden box with all the evils of the world in it, Gramps said that those 
myths evolved because people needed a way to explain where fire came 
from and why there was evil in the world. That made me think of Phoebe 
and the lunatic, and I said, 'If I was walking in Phoebe's moccasins, I would 
want to believe in a lunatic and an axe- wielding Mrs. Cadaver to explain my 
mother's disappearance.' 


Phoebe and her family helped me, I think. They helped me to think about 
and understand my own mother. Phoebe's tales were like my fishing in the 



air: for a while I needed to believe that my mother was not dead and that she 
would come back. 

I still fish in the air sometimes. 

It seems to me that we can't explain all the truly awful things in the world 
like war and murder and brain tumours, and we can't fix these things, so we 
look at the frightening things that are closer to us and we magnify them until 
they burst open. Inside is something that we can manage, something that 
isn't as awful as it had at first seemed. It is a relief to discover that although 
there might be axe murderers and kidnappers in the world, most people seem 
a lot like us: sometimes afraid and sometimes brave, sometimes cruel and 
sometimes kind. 

I decided that bravery is looking Pandora's box full in the eye as best you 
can, and then turning to the other box, the one with the smooth beautiful 
folds inside: Momma kissing trees, my Gram saying, 'Huzza, huzza,' Gramps 
and his marriage bed. 

My mother's postcards and her hair are still beneath the floorboards in my 
room. I re-read all the postcards when I came home. Gram and Gramps and I 
had been to every place my mother had. There are the Black Hills, Mount 
Rushmore, the Badlands - the only card that is still hard for me to read is the 
one from Coeur d'Alene, the one that I received two days after she died. 

When I drive Gramps around in his truck, I also tell him all the stories my 
mother told me. His favourite is a Navaho one about Estsanatlehi. She’s a 
woman who never dies. She grows from baby to mother to old woman and 
then turns into a baby again, and on and on she goes, living a thousand, 
thousand lives. Gramps likes this, and so do I. 

I still climb the sugar maple tree and I have heard the singing tree sing. 

The sugar maple tree is my thinking place. Yesterday in the sugar maple, I 
realized that I was jealous of three things 

The first jealousy is a foolish one. I am jealous of whomever Ben wrote 
about in his journal, because it was not me. 


The second jealousy is this: I am jealous that my mother had wanted more 
children. Wasn't I enough? When I walk in her moccasins, though, I say, 'If I 



were my mother, I might want more children - not because I don't love my 
Salamanca, but because I love her so much. I want more of these.' Maybe 
that is a fish in the air and maybe it isn't, but it is what I want to believe. 

The last jealousy is not foolish, nor is it one that will go away just yet. I 
am still jealous that Phoebe's mother came back and mine did not. 

I miss my mother. 

Ben and Phoebe write to me all the time. Ben sent me a valentine in the 
middle of October that said, 


Roses are red 
Dirt is brown, 

Please be my valentine, 

Or else I'll frown. 

There was a p. s. added: I've never written poetry before. 

I sent a valentine back that said: 

Dry is the desert, 

Wet is the rain, 

Your love for me 
Is not in vain. 

I added a p.s. that said, I've never written any poetry either. 

Ben and Phoebe and Mrs. Cadaver and Mrs. Partridge are all coming to 
visit next month. There is a chance that Mr. Birkway might come as well, 
but Phoebe hopes not, as she does not think she could stand to be in a car for 
that long with a teacher. My father and I have been scrubbing the house for 
their visit. I can't wait to show Phoebe and Ben the swimming hole and the 
fields, the hayloft and the trees, and the cows and the chickens Blackberry, 
the chicken that Ben gave me, is queen of the coop, and I'll show Ben her, 
too. I am hoping, also, for some blackberry kisses between me and Ben. 


But, for now, Cramps has his beagle, and I have a chicken and a singing 
tree, and that's the way it is. Huzza, huzza. 



END OF BOOK 


